MULTI-SECTOR SERVICE ACCOUNTABILITY AGREEMENT 
April 1,2018 to March 31, 2019 


SERVICE ACCOUNTABILITY AGREEMENT 
with 

Sandy Hill Community Health Centre 
Effective Date: April 1,2018 
Index to Agreement 


ARTICLE 1.0 
ARTICLE 2.0 
ARTICLE 3.0 
ARTICLE 4.0 
ARTICLE 5.0 
ARTICLE 6.0 
ARTICLE 7.0 
ARTICLE 8.0 
ARTICLE 9.0 
ARTICLE 10.0 
ARTICLE 11.0 
ARTICLE 12.0 
ARTICLE 13.0 
ARTICLE 14.0 
ARTICLE 15.0 


- DEFINITIONS & INTERPRETATION 

- TERM AND NATURE OF THIS AGREEMENT 

- PROVISION OF SERVICES 

- FUNDING 

- REPAYMENT AND RECOVERY OF FUNDING 

- PLANNING & INTEGRATION 

- PERFORMANCE 

- REPORTING, ACCOUNTING AND REVIEW 

- ACKNOWLEDGEMENT OF LHIN SUPPORT 

- REPRESENTATIONS, WARRANTIES AND COVENANTS 

- LIMITATION OF LIABILITY, INDEMNITY & INSURANCE 

- TERMINATION OF AGREEMENT 

- NOTICE 

- ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS 

- ENTIRE AGREEMENT 


Schedules 

A - Detailed Description of Services 

B - Service Plan 

C - Reports 

D - Directives, Guidelines, Policies & Standards 

E - Performance 

F - Project Funding Agreement Template 

G - Declaration of Compliance 





THE AGREEMENT effective as of the 1®‘ day of April, 2018 


BETWEEN: 

CHAMPLAIN LOCAL HEALTH INTEGRATION NETWORK (the “LHIN”) 

- and - 

Sandy Hill Community Health Centre (the “HSP”) 


Background: 

This service accountability agreement, entered into pursuant to the Local Health System 
Integration Act, 2006 (“LHSIA”), reflects and supports the commitment of the LHIN and the 
HSP to, separately, jointly, and in cooperation with other stakeholders, work diligently and 
collaboratively toward the achievement of the purpose of LHSIA, namely “to provide for an 
integrated health system to improve the health of Ontarians through better access to high 
quality health services, co-ordinated health care in local health systems and across the 
province and effective and efficient management of the health system at the local level by local 
health integration networks”. 

The HSP and the LHIN, being committed to a health care system as envisioned by LHSIA and 
the Patient’s First: Action Plan for Health Care (“Patients First”), intend to cooperate to 
advance the purpose and objects of LHSIA and the further development of a patient-centered, 
integrated, accountable, transparent, and evidence-based health system contemplated by 
LHSIA and Patients First. They will do so by such actions as: supporting the development and 
implementation of sub-regions and Health Links to facilitate regional integrated health care 
service delivery; breaking down silos that inhibit the seamless transition of patients within the 
health care system; striving for the highest quality and continuous improvement in the delivery 
of health services and in all aspects of the health system, including by identifying and 
addressing the root causes of health inequities, and by improving access to primary care, 
mental health and addiction services and wait times for specialists; and otherwise striving for 
the highest quality and continuous improvement in the delivery of health services and in all 
aspects of the health system. 

The HSP and the LHIN are committed to working together, and with others, to achieve evolving 
provincial priorities described: in mandate letters from the Minister of Health and Long-Term 
Care to the LHIN, from time to time; in the provincial strategic plan for the health system; and, 
in the LHIN’s Integrated Health Services Plan. 

In this context, the HSP and the LHIN agree that the LHIN will provide funding to the HSP on 
the terms and conditions set out in this Agreement to enable the provision of services to the 
local health system by the HSP. 

In consideration of their respective agreements set out below, the LHIN and the HSP covenant 
and agree as follows: 


Multi-Sector Service Accountability Agreement April 1,2018 - March 31,2019 


Page 2 of 33 



ARTICLE 1.0- DEFINITIONS & INTERPRETATION 


1.1 Definitions. In this Agreement the following terms will have the following meanings: 

“Accountability Agreement” means the accountability agreement, as that term is 
defined in LHSIA, in place between the LHIN and the MOHLTC during a Funding Year, 
currently referred to as the Ministry-LHIN Accountability Agreement; 


“Active Offer” means the clear and proactive offer of service in French to individuals, 
from the first point of contact, without placing the responsibility of requesting services in 
French on the individual; 

“Agreement” means this agreement and includes the Schedules, as amended from 
time to time; 

“Annual Balanced Budget” means that, in each Funding Year of the term of this 
Agreement, the total revenues of the HSP are greater than or equal to the total 
expenses, from all sources, of the HSP; 

“Applicable Law” means all federal, provincial or municipal laws, regulations, common 
law, any orders, rules or by-laws that are applicable to the HSP, the Services, this 
Agreement and the parties’ obligations under this Agreement during the term of this 
Agreement; 

“Applicable Policy” means any rules, policies, directives, standards of practice or 
Program Parameters issued or adopted by the LHIN, the MOHLTC or other ministries 
or agencies of the province of Ontario that are applicable to the HSP, the Services, this 
Agreement and the parties’ obligations under this Agreement during the term of this 
Agreement. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing. Applicable Policy includes 
the other documents identified in Schedule D; 

“Board” means: 

(1) in respect of an HSP that does not have a Long-Term Care Home Service 
Accountability Agreement with the LHIN and is: 

(a) a corporation, the board of directors; 

(b) a First Nation, the band council; and 

(c) a municipality, the municipal council; 
and, 

(2) in respect of an HSP that has a Long-Term Care Home Service Accountability 
Agreement with the LHIN and is: 

(a) a corporation, the board of directors; 

(b) a First Nation, the band council; 

(c) a municipality, the committee of management; 


Multi-Sector Service Accountability Agreement April 1,2018 - March 31,2019 


Page 3 of 33 



(d) a board of management established by one or more municipalities or by one 
or more First Nations’ band councils, the members of the board of 
management; 

“BPSAA” means the Broader Public Sector Accountability Act, 2010 and regulations 
made under it, as it and they may be amended from time to time; 

“Budget” means the budget approved by the LHIN and appended to this Agreement in 
Schedule B; 

“CEO” means the individual accountable to the Board for the provision of the Services 
in accordance with the terms of this Agreement; 

“Chair” means, if the HSP is: 

(a) a corporation, the Chair of the Board; 

(b) a First Nation, the Chief; and 

(c) a municipality, the Mayor, 

or such other person properly authorized by the Board or under Applicable Law; 

“Compliance Declaration” means a compliance declaration substantially in the form 
set out in Schedule G; 

“Confidential Information” means information that is: (1) marked or otherwise 
identified as confidential by the disclosing party at the time the information is provided 
to the receiving party; and (2) eligible for exclusion from disclosure at a public board 
meeting in accordance with section 9 of LHSIA. Confidential Information does not 
include information that: (a) was known to the receiving party prior to receiving the 
information from the disclosing party; (b) has become publicly known through no 
wrongful act of the receiving party; or (c) is required to be disclosed by law, provided 
that the receiving party provides Notice in a timely manner of such requirement to the 
disclosing party, consults with the disclosing party on the proposed form and nature of 
the disclosure, and ensures that any disclosure is made in strict accordance with 
Applicable Law; 

“Conflict of Interest” in respect of an HSP, includes any situation or circumstance 
where: in relation to the performance of its obligations under this Agreement: 

(a) the HSP; 

(b) a member of the HSP’s Board; or 

(c) any person employed by the HSP who has the capacity to influence the 
HSP’s decision, 

has other commitments, relationships or financial interests that: 

(a) could or could be seen to interfere with the HSP’s objective, unbiased and 
impartial exercise of its judgement; or 

(b) could or could be seen to compromise, impair or be incompatible with the 
effective performance of its obligations under this Agreement; 

“Controlling Shareholder” of a corporation means a shareholder who or which holds 
(or another person who or which holds for the benefit of such shareholder), other than 
by way of security only, voting securities of such corporation carrying more than 50% of 
the votes for the election of directors, provided that the votes carried by such securities 


Multi-Sector Service Accountability Agreement April 1,2018 - March 31,2019 


Page 4 of 33 



are sufficient, if exercised, to elect a majority of the board of directors of such 
corporation; 

“Days” means calendar days; 

“Digital Health” has the meaning ascribed to it in the Accountability Agreement and 
means the coordinated and integrated use of electronic systems, information and 
communication technologies to facilitate the collection, exchange and management of 
personal health information in order to improve the quality, access, productivity and 
sustainability of the healthcare system; 

Designated means designated as a public service agency under the FLSA; 

“Effective Date” means April 1,2018; 

“Explanatory Indicator” means a measure of the HSP’s performance for which no 
Performance Target is set. Technical specifications of specific Explanatory Indicators 
can be found in the “MSAA Indicator Technical Specifications document”. 

“FIPPA” means the Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Act {Ontano) 
and the regulations made it as it and they may be amended from time to time; 


“FLSA” means the French Language Services Act and the regulations made under the 
French Language Services Act, as it and they may be amended from time to time; 


“Funding” means the amounts of money provided by the LHIN to the HSP in each 
Funding Year of this Agreement; 

“Funding Year” means in the case of the first Funding Year, the period commencing 
on the Effective Date and ending on the following March 31, and in the case of Funding 
Years subsequent to the first Funding Year, the period commencing on the date that is 
April 1 following the end of the previous Funding Year and ending on the following 
March 31; 

“HSP’s Personnel and Volunteers” means the controlling shareholders (if any), 
directors, officers, employees, agents, volunteers and other representatives of the HSP. 
In addition to the foregoing, HSP’s Personnel and Volunteers shall include the 
contractors and subcontractors and their respective shareholders, directors, officers, 
employees, agents, volunteers or other representatives; 


“Identified” means identified by the LHIN or the Ministry to provide French language 
services; 

“Indemnified Parties” means the LHIN and its officers, employees, directors, 
independent contractors, subcontractors, agents, successors and assigns and her 
Majesty the Queen in Right of Ontario and her Ministers, appointees and employees. 


Multi-Sector Service Accountability Agreement April 1,2018 - March 31,2019 


Page 5 of 33 



independent contractors, subcontractors, agents and assigns. Indemnified parties also 
includes any person participating on behalf of the LHIN in a Review; 

“Interest Income” means interest earned on the Funding; 

“LHIN Cluster” has the meaning ascribed to it in the Accountability Agreement and is 
a grouping of LHINs for the purpose of advancing Digital Health initiatives through 
regional coordination aligned with the MOHLTC’s provincial priorities. 


“LHSIA” means the Local Health System Integration Act, 2006, and the regulations 
made under it, as it and they may be amended from time to time; 

“Mandate Letter” has the meaning ascribed to it in the Memorandum of Understanding 
between MOHLTC and the LHIN, and means a letter from the Minister to the LHIN 
establishing priorities in accordance with the Premier’s mandate letter to the Minister. 


“MOHLTC” means the Minister or the Ministry of Health and Long-Term Care, as the 
context requires; 

“MSAA Indicator Technical Specifications document” means, as the context 
requires, either or both of the document entitled “Multi-Sector Service Accountability 
Agreement 2014-19: Indicator Technical Specifications October 20, 2017” and the 
document entitled “2016-17 Multi-Sector Service Accountability Agreements (MSAA) 
Target and Corridor Setting Guideline” as they may be amended or replaced from time 
to time; 

“Notice” means any notice or other communication required to be provided pursuant to 
this Agreement or LHSIA; 

“Performance Agreement” means an agreement between an HSP and its CEO that 
requires the CEO to perform in a manner that enables the HSP to achieve the terms of 
this Agreement and any additional performance improvement targets set out in the 
HSP’s annual quality improvement plan under the Excellent Care for All Act, 2010; 

“Performance Corridor” means the acceptable range of results around a Performance 
Target. 

“Performance Factor” means any matter that could or will significantly affect a party’s 
ability to fulfill its obligations under this Agreement; 

“Performance indicator” means a measure of HSP performance for which a 
Performance Target is set; technical specifications of specific Performance Indicators 
can be found in the MSAA Indicator Technical Specifications document; 

“Performance Standard” means the acceptable range of performance for a 
Performance Indicator or a Service Volume that results when a Performance Corridor is 
applied to a Performance Target. 

“Performance Target” means the level of performance expected of the HSP in respect 


Multi-Sector Service Accountability Agreement April 1,2018 - March 31,2019 


Page 6 of 33 



of a Performance Indicator or a Service Volume. 


“person or entity” includes any individual and any corporation, partnership, firm, joint 
venture or other single or collective form of organization under which business may be 
conducted; 


“Planning Submission” or “CAPS” or “Community Accountability Planning 
Submission” means the HSP Board approved planning document submitted by the 
HSP to the LHIN. The form, content and scheduling of the Planning Submission will be 
identified by the LHIN; 

“Program Parameter” means, in respect of a program, the provincial standards (such 
as operational, financial or service standards and policies, operating manuals and 
program eligibility), directives, guidelines and expectations and requirements for that 
program; 

“Project Funding Agreement” means an agreement in the form of Schedule F that 
incorporates the terms of this Agreement and enables the LHIN to provide one-time or 
short term funding for a specific project or service that is not already described in 
Schedule A; 

“Reports” means the reports described in Schedule C as well as any other reports or 
information required to be provided under LHSIA or this Agreement; 

“Review” means a financial or operational audit, investigation, inspection or other form 
of review requested or required by the LHIN under the terms of LHSIA or this 
Agreement, but does not include the annual audit of the HSP’s financial statements; 

“Scheduie” means any one of, and “Schedules” mean any two or more, as the context 
requires, of the schedules appended to this Agreement including the following: 

Scheduie A: Description of Services 

Scheduie B: Service Plan 

Scheduie C: Reports 

Scheduie D: Directives, Guidelines and Policies 
Scheduie E: Performance 
Scheduie F: Project Funding Agreement Template 
Scheduie G: Declaration of Compliance 

“Service Pian” means the Operating Plan and Budget appended as Schedule B; 


Multi-Sector Service Accountability Agreement April 1,2018 - March 31,2019 


Page 7 of 33 



“Services” means the care, programs, goods and other services described in Schedule 
A and in any Project Funding Agreement executed pursuant to this Agreement. 
“Services” includes the type, volume, frequency and availability of the care, programs, 
goods and other services; 

“Service Voiume” means a measure of Services for which a Performance Target is 
set; 

“Transition Pian” means a transition plan, acceptable to the LHIN that indicates how 
the needs of the HSP’s clients will be met following the termination of this Agreement 
and how the transition of the clients to new service providers will be effected in a timely 
manner; and 

“2014-18 MSAA” means the Multi-Sector Service Accountability Agreement April 1, 
2014 to March 31,2018. 

1 .2 Interpretation. Words in the singular include the plural and vice-versa. Words in one 
gender include all genders. The words “including” and “includes” are not intended to be 
limiting and shall mean “including without limitation” or “includes without limitation”, as 
the case may be. The headings do not form part of this Agreement. They are for 
convenience of reference only and will not affect the interpretation of this Agreement. 
Terms used in the Schedules shall have the meanings set out in this Agreement unless 
separately and specifically defined in a Schedule in which case the definition in the 
Schedule shall govern for the purposes of that Schedule. 


1.3 MSAA Indicator Technical Specification Document. This Agreement shall be 

interpreted with reference to the MSAA Indicator Technical Specifications Document. 


ARTICLE 2.0- TERM AND NATURE OF THIS AGREEMENT 


2.1 Term. The term of this Agreement will commence on the Effective Date and will expire 
on March 31,2019 unless terminated earlier or extended pursuant to its terms. 


2.2 A Service Accountability Agreement. This Agreement is a service accountability 
agreement for the purposes of section 20(1) of LHSIA. 

ARTICLE 3.0- PROVISION OF SERVICES 


3.1 Provision of Services. 

(a) The HSP will provide the Services in accordance with, and otherwise comply 
with: 

(1) the terms of this Agreement, including the Service Plan; 

(2) Applicable Law; and 


Multi-Sector Service Accountability Agreement April 1,2018 - March 31,2019 


Page 8 of 33 



(3) Applicable Policy. 


(b) When providing the Services, the HSP will meet the Performance Standards 
and conditions identified in Schedule E. 

(c) Unless otherwise provided in this Agreement, the HSP will not reduce, stop, 
start, expand, cease to provide or transfer the provision of the Services or 
change its Service Plan except with Notice to the LHIN, and if required by 
Applicable Law or Applicable Policy, the prior written consent of the LHIN. 

(d) The HSP will not restrict or refuse the provision of Services to an individual, 
directly or indirectly, based on the geographic area in which the person resides 
in Ontario. 

3.2 Subcontracting for the Provision of Services. 

(a) The parties acknowledge that, subject to the provisions of LHSIA, the HSP may 
subcontract the provision of some or all of the Services. For the purposes of 
this Agreement, actions taken or not taken by the subcontractor, and Services 
provided by the subcontractor, will be deemed actions taken or not taken by the 
HSP, and Services provided by the HSP. 

(b) When entering into a subcontract the HSP agrees that the terms of the 
subcontract will enable the HSP to meet its obligations under this Agreement. 
Without limiting the foregoing, the HSP will include a provision that permits the 
LHIN or its authorized representatives, to audit the subcontractor in respect of 
the subcontract if the LHIN or its authorized representatives determines that 
such an audit would be necessary to confirm that the HSP has complied with 
the terms of this Agreement. 

(c) Nothing contained in this Agreement or a subcontract will create a contractual 
relationship between any subcontractor or its directors, officers, employees, 
agents, partners, affiliates or volunteers and the LHIN. 

3.3 Conflict of Interest. The HSP will use the Funding, provide the Services and 
otherwise fulfil its obligations under this Agreement, without an actual, potential or 
perceived Conflict of Interest. The HSP will disclose to the LHIN without delay any 
situation that a reasonable person would interpret as an actual, potential or perceived 
Conflict of Interest and comply with any requirements prescribed by the LHIN to resolve 
any Conflict of Interest. 


3.4 Digital Health. The HSP agrees to: 

(a) assist the LHIN to implement provincial e-health priorities for 2017-18 and 
thereafter in accordance with the Accountability Agreement, as may be 
amended or replaced from time to time; 


Multi-Sector Service Accountability Agreement April 1,2018 - March 31,2019 


Page 9 of 33 



(b) comply with any technical and information management standards, including 
those related to data, architecture, technology, privacy and security set for 
health service providers by MOHLTC or the LHIN within the timeframes set by 
MOHLTC or the LHIN as the case may be; 

(c) implement and use the approved provincial Digital Health solutions identified in 
the LHIN Digital Health plan; 

(d) implement technology solutions that are compatible or interoperable with the 
provincial blueprint and with the LHIN Cluster Digital Health plan; and 

(e) include in its annual Planning Submissions, plans for achieving Digital Health 
priority initiatives. 

3.5 French Language Services. 

3.5.1 The LHIN will provide the MOHLTC “Guide to Requirements and Obligations of LHIN 
French Language Services” to the HSP and the HSP will fulfill its roles, responsibilities and 
other obligations set out therein. 

3.5.2 If Not Identified or Designated. If the HSP has not been Designated or Identified it will: 

(a) develop and implement a plan to address the needs of the local 
Francophone community, including the provision of information on 
services available in French; 

(b) work towards applying the principles of Active Offer in the provision of 
services; 

(c) provide a report to the LHIN that outlines how the HSP addresses the 
needs of its local Francophone community; and, 

(d) collect and submit to the LHIN as requested by the LHIN from time to 
time, French language service data. 

3.5.3 If Identified. If the HSP is Identified it will: 

(a) work towards applying the principles of Active Offer in the provision of 
services; 

(b) provide services to the public in French in accordance with its existing 
French language services capacity; 

(c) develop, and provide to the LHIN upon request from time to time, a plan to 
become Designated by the date agreed to by the HSP and the LHIN; 

(d) continuously work towards improving its capacity to provide services in 
French and toward becoming Designated within the time frame agreed to 
by the parties; 

(e) provide a report to the LHIN that outlines progress in its capacity to provide 
services in French and toward becoming Designated; 

(f) annually, provide a report to the LHIN that outlines how it addresses the 
needs of its local Francophone community; 


Multi-Sector Service Accountability Agreement April 1,2018 - March 31,2019 


Page 10 of 33 



(g) collect and submit to the LHIN, as requested by the LHIN from time to time, French 
language services data. 

3.5.4 If Designated. If the HSP is Designated it will: 

(a) apply the principles of Active Offer in the provision of services; 

(b) continue to provide services to the public in French in accordance with the 
provisions of the FLSA ; 

(c) maintain its French language services capacity; 

(d) submit a French language implementation report to the LHIN on the date 
specified by the LHIN, and thereafter, on each anniversary of that date, or 
on such other dates as the LHIN may, by notice, require; 

(e) collect and submit to the LHIN as requested by the LHIN from time to time, 
French language services data. 


3.6 Minister’s Mandate Letter language. The LHIN will receive a Mandate Letter from 
the Minister annually. Each Mandate Letter articulates areas of focus for the LHIN, and 
the Minister’s expectation that the LHIN and health service providers it funds will 
collaborate to advance these areas of focus. To assist the HSP in its collaborative 
efforts with the LHIN, the LHIN will share each relevant Mandate Letter with the HSP. 
The LHIN may also add local obligations to Schedule E as appropriate to further 
advance any priorities set put in a Mandate Letter. 

3.7 Policies, Guidelines, Directives and Standards. Either the LHIN or the MOHLTC will 
give the HSP Notice of any amendments to the manuals, guidelines or policies 
identified in Schedule D. Amendments will be effective in accordance with the terms of 
the amendment. By signing a copy of this Agreement the HSP acknowledges that it has 
a copy of the documents identified in Schedule D. 


ARTICLE 4.0- FUNDING 


4.1 Funding. Subject to the terms of this Agreement, and in accordance with the applicable 

provisions of the Accountability Agreement, the LHIN: 

(a) will provide the funds identified in Schedule B to the HSP for the purpose of 
providing or ensuring the provision of the Services; 

(b) and 

(c) will deposit the funds in regular instalments, once or twice monthly, over the 
term of this Agreement, into an account designated by the HSP provided that 
the account resides at a Canadian financial institution and is in the name of the 
HSP. 


Multi-Sector Service Accountability Agreement April 1,2018 - March 31,2019 


Page 11 of 33 



4.2 Limitation on Payment of Funding. Despite section 4.1, the LHIN: 


(a) will not provide any funds to the HSP until this Agreement is fully executed; 

(b) may pro-rate the funds identified in Schedule B to the date on which this 
Agreement is signed, if that date is after April 1; 

(c) will not provide any funds to the HSP until the HSP meets the insurance 
requirements described in section 11.4; 

(d) will not be required to continue to provide funds in the event the HSP breaches 
any of its obligations under this Agreement, until the breach is remedied to the 
LHIN’s satisfaction; and 

(e) upon notice to the HSP, may adjust the amount of funds it provides to the HSP 
in any Funding Year based upon the LHIN’s assessment of the information 
contained in the Reports. 

4.3 Appropriation. Funding under this Agreement is conditional upon an appropriation of 
moneys by the Legislature of Ontario to the MOHLTC and funding of the LHIN by the 
MOHLTC pursuant to LHSIA. If the LHIN does not receive its anticipated funding the 
LHIN will not be obligated to make the payments required by this Agreement. 


4.4 Additional Funding. 

(a) Unless the LHIN has agreed to do so in writing, the LHIN is not required to 
provide additional funds to the HSP for providing additional Services or for 
exceeding the requirements of Schedule E. 

(b) The HSP may request additional funding by submitting a proposal to amend its 
Service Plan. The HSP will abide by all decisions of the LHIN with respect to a 
proposal to amend the Service Plan and will make whatever changes are 
requested or approved by the LHIN. The Service Plan will be amended to 
include any approved additional funding. 

(c) Funding Increases. Before the LHIN can make an allocation of additional funds 
to the HSP, the parties will: (1) agree on the amount of the increase; (2) agree 
on any terms and conditions that will apply to the increase; and (3) execute an 
amendment to this Agreement that reflects the agreement reached. 

4.5 Conditions of Funding. 

(a) The HSP will: 

(1) fulfill all obligations in this Agreement; 


Multi-Sector Service Accountability Agreement April 1,2018 - March 31,2019 


Page 12 of 33 



(2) use the Funding only for the purpose of providing the Services in 
accordance with Applicable Law, Applicable Policy and the terms of this 
Agreement; 

(3) spend the Funding only in accordance with the Service Plan; and 

(4) plan for and achieve an Annual Balanced Budget. 

(b) The LHIN may add such additional terms or conditions on the use of the 
Funding which it considers appropriate for the proper expenditure and 
management of the Funding. 

(c) All Funding is subject to all Applicable Law and Applicable Policy, including 
Health System Funding Reform, as it may evolve or be replaced over the term 
of this Agreement 

4.6 Interest. 

(a) If the LHIN provides the Funding to the HSP prior to the HSP’s immediate need 
for the Funding, the HSP shall place the Funding in an interest bearing account 
in the name of the HSP at a Canadian financial institution. 

(b) Interest Income must be used, within the fiscal year in which it is received, to 
provide the Services. 

(c) Interest Income will be reported to the LHIN and is subject to year-end 
reconciliation. In the event that some or all of the Interest Income is not used to 
provide the Services, 

(1) the LHIN may deduct the amount equal to the unused Interest Income 
from any further Funding instalments under this or any other agreement 
with the HSP; and/or 

(2) the LHIN may require the HSP to pay an amount equal to the unused 
Interest Income to the Ministry of Finance. 

4.7 Rebates, Credits and Refunds. The HSP: 

(a) acknowledges that rebates, credits and refunds it anticipates receiving from the 
use of the Funding have been incorporated in its Budget; 

(b) agrees that it will advise the LHIN if it receives any unanticipated rebates, 
credits and refunds from the use of the Funding, or from the use of funding 
received from either the LHIN or the MOHLTC in years prior to this Agreement 
that was not recorded in the year of the related expenditure; 

(c) agrees that all rebates, credits and refunds referred to in (b) will be considered 
Funding in the year that the rebates are received, regardless of the year to 
which the rebate relates. 


Multi-Sector Service Accountability Agreement April 1,2018 - March 31,2019 


Page 13 of 33 



4.8 Procurement of Goods and Services. 


(a) If the HSP is subject to the procurement provisions of the BPSAA, the HSP will 
abide by all directives and guidelines issued by the Management Board of 
Cabinet that are applicable to the HSP pursuant to the BPSAA. 

(b) If the HSP is not subject to the procurement provisions of the BPSAA, the HSP 
will have a procurement policy in place that requires the acquisition of supplies, 
equipment or services valued at over $25,000 through a competitive process 
that ensures the best value for funds expended. If the HSP acquires supplies, 
equipment or services with the Funding it will do so through a process that is 
consistent with this policy. 

4.9 Disposition. The HSP will not, without the LHIN’s prior written consent, sell, lease or 
otherwise dispose of any assets purchased with Funding, the cost of which exceeded 
$25,000 at the time of purchase. 


ARTiCLE 5.0- REPAYMENT AND RECOVERY OF FUNDING 


5.1 Repayment and Recovery. 

(a) At the End of a Funding Year. If, in any Funding Year, the HSP has not spent 
all of the Funding the LHIN will require the repayment of the unspent Funding. 

(b) On Termination or Expiration of this Agreement. Upon termination or expiry 
of this Agreement, the LHIN will require the repayment of any Funding 
remaining in the possession or under the control of the HSP and the payment of 
an amount equal to any Funding the HSP used for purposes not permitted by 
this Agreement. 

(c) On Reconciliation and Settlement. If the year-end reconciliation and 
settlement process demonstrates that the HSP received Funding in excess of its 
confirmed funds, the LHIN will require the repayment of the excess Funding. 

(d) As a Result of Performance Management or System Planning. If Services 
are adjusted, as a result of the performance management or system planning 
processes, the LHIN may adjust the Funding to be paid under Schedule B, 
require the repayment of excess Funding and/or adjust the amount of any future 
funding installments accordingly. 

(e) In the Event of Forecasted Surpluses. If the HSP is forecasting a surplus, the 
LHIN may adjust the amount of Funding to be paid under Schedule B, require 
the repayment of excess Funding and/or adjust the amount of any future 
funding installments accordingly. 

(f) On the Request of the LHIN. The HSP will, at the request of the LHIN, repay 
the whole or any part of the Funding, or an amount equal thereto if the HSP: 


Multi-Sector Service Accountability Agreement April 1,2018 - March 31,2019 


Page 14 of 33 



(1) has provided false information to the LHIN knowing it to be false; 

(2) breaches a term or condition of this Agreement and does not, within 30 
Days after receiving Notice from the LHIN take reasonable steps to 
remedy the breach; or 

(3) breaches any Applicable Law that directly relates to the provision of, or 
ensuring the provision of, the Services. 

(g) Subsections 5.1 (c) and (d) do not apply to Funding already expended properly 
in accordance with this Agreement. The LHIN will, at its sole discretion, and 
without liability or penalty, determine whether the Funding has been expended 
properly in accordance with this Agreement. 

5.2 Provision for the Recovery of Funding. The HSP will make reasonable and prudent 
provision for the recovery by the LHIN of any Funding for which the conditions of 
Funding set out in section 4.5 are not met and will hold this Funding in accordance with 
the provisions of section 4.6 until such time as reconciliation and settlement has 
occurred with the LHIN. Interest earned on Funding will be reported and recovered in 
accordance with section 4.6. 


5.3 Settlement and Recovery of Funding for Prior Years. 

(a) The HSP acknowledges that settlement and recovery of Funding can occur up 
to seven years after the provision of Funding. 

(b) Recognizing the transition of responsibilities from the MOHLTC to the LHIN, the 
HSP agrees that if the parties are directed in writing to do so by the MOHLTC, 
the LHIN will settle and recover funding provided by the MOHLTC to the HSP 
prior to the transition of the Funding for the Services to the LHIN, provided that 
such settlement and recovery occurs within seven years of the provision of the 
funding by the MOHLTC. All such settlements and recoveries will be subject to 
the terms applicable to the original provision of funding. 

5.4 Debt Due. 

(a) If the LHIN requires the re-payment by the HSP of any Funding, the amount 
required will be deemed to be a debt owing to the Crown by the HSP. The LHIN 
may adjust future funding instalments to recover the amounts owed or may, at 
its discretion direct the HSP to pay the amount owing to the Crown and the HSP 
shall comply immediately with any such direction. 

(b) All amounts repayable to the Crown will be paid by cheque payable to the 
“Ontario Minister of Finance” and mailed or delivered to the LHIN at the address 
provided in section 13.1. 


Multi-Sector Service Accountability Agreement April 1,2018 - March 31,2019 


Page 15 of 33 



5.5 Interest Rate. The LHIN may charge the HSP interest on any amount owing by the 
HSP at the then current interest rate charged by the Province of Ontario on accounts 
receivable. 


ARTICLE 6.0- PLANNING & INTEGRATION 


6.1 Planning for Future Years. 

(a) Advance Notice. The LHIN will give at least sixty Days’ Notice to the HSP of 
the date by which a CAPS must be submitted to the LHIN. 

(b) Multi-Year Planning. The CAPS will be in a form acceptable to the LHIN and 
may be required to incorporate (1) prudent multi-year financial forecasts; (2) 
plans for the achievement of performance targets; and (3) realistic risk 
management strategies. It will be aligned with the LHIN’s then current 
Integrated Health Service Plan and will reflect local LHIN priorities and 
initiatives. If the LHIN has provided multi-year planning targets for the HSP, the 
CAPS will reflect the planning targets. 

(c) Multi-year Planning Targets. Schedule B may reflect an allocation for the first 
Funding Year of this Agreement as well as planning targets for up to two 
additional years, consistent with the term of this Agreement. In such an event, 

(1) the HSP acknowledges that if it is provided with planning targets, these 
targets are: (A) targets only, (B) provided solely for the purposes of 
planning, (C) are subject to confirmation, and (D) may be changed at the 
discretion of the LHIN in consultation with the HSP. The HSP will 
proactively manage the risks associated with multi-year planning and the 
potential changes to the planning targets; and 

(2) the LHIN agrees that it will communicate any changes to the planning 
targets as soon as reasonably possible. 

(d) Service Accountability Agreements. The HSP acknowledges that if the LHIN 
and the HSP enter into negotiations for a subsequent service accountability 
agreement, subsequent funding may be interrupted if the next service 
accountability agreement is not executed on or before the expiration date of this 
Agreement. 

6.2 Community Engagement & Integration Activities. 

(a) Community Engagement. The HSP will engage the community of diverse 

persons and entities in the area where it provides health services when setting 
priorities for the delivery of health services and when developing plans for 
submission to the LHIN including but not limited to CAPS and integration 
proposals. As part of its community engagement activities, the HSPs will have 
in place and utilize effective mechanisms for engaging families, caregivers. 


Multi-Sector Service Accountability Agreement April 1,2018 - March 31,2019 


Page 16 of 33 



clients, residents, patients and other individuals who use the services of the 
HSP, to help inform the HSP plans, including the HSP’s contribution to the 
establishment and implementation by the LHIN of geographic sub-regions in its 
local health system. 

(b) Integration. The HSP will, separately and in conjunction with the LHIN and other 
health service providers, identify opportunities to integrate the services of the 
local health system to provide appropriate, co-coordinated, effective and 
efficient services. 

(c) Reporting. The HSP will report on its community engagement and integration 
activities, using any templates provided by the LHIN, as requested by the LHIN 
and in any event, in its year-end report to the LHIN. 

6.3 Planning and Integration Activity Pre-proposals 

(a) General. A pre-proposal process has been developed to: (1) reduce the costs 
incurred by an HSP when proposing operational or service changes; (2) assist 
the HSP to carry out its statutory obligations; and (3) enable an effective and 
efficient response by the LHIN. Subject to specific direction from the LHIN, this 
pre-proposal process will be used in the following instances: 

(1) the HSP is considering an integration or an integration of services, as 
defined in LHSIA between the HSP and another person or entity; 

(2) the HSP is proposing to reduce, stop, start, expand or transfer the 
location of services, which for certainty includes: the transfer of Services 
from the HSP to another person or entity whether within or outside of the 
LHIN; and the relocation or transfer of services from one of the HSP’s 
sites to another of the HSP’s sites whether within or outside of the LHIN; 

(3) to identify opportunities to integrate the services of the local health 
system, other than those identified in (1) or (2) above; or 

(4) if requested by the LHIN. 

(b) LHIN Evaluation of the Pre-proposal. Use of the pre-proposal process is not 
formal Notice of a proposed integration under section 27 of LHSIA. LHIN 
consent to develop the project concept outlined in a pre-proposal does not 
constitute approval to proceed with the project. Nor does LHIN consent to 
develop a project concept presume the issuance of a favourable decision, 
should such a decision be required by sections 25 or 27 of LHSIA. Following 
the LHIN’s review and evaluation, the HSP may be invited to submit a detailed 
proposal and a business plan for further analysis. Guidelines for the 
development of a detailed proposal and business case will be provided by the 
LHIN. 


Multi-Sector Service Accountability Agreement April 1,2018 - March 31,2019 


Page 17 of 33 



6.4 Proposing Integration Activities in the Planning Submission. No integration 
activity described in section 6.3 may be proposed in a CAPS unless the LHIN has 
consented, in writing, to its inclusion pursuant to the process set out in section 6.3(b). 


6.5 Definitions. In this section 6.0, the terms “integrate”, “integration” and “services” have 
the same meanings attributed to them in section 2(1) and section 23 respectively of 
LHSIA, as it and they may be amended from time to time. 


ARTICLE 7.0- PERFORMANCE 


7.1 Performance. The parties will strive to achieve on-going performance improvement. 

They will address performance improvement in a proactive, collaborative and 

responsive manner. 

7.2 Performance Factors. 

(a) Each party will notify the other party of the existence of a Performance Factor, 
as soon as reasonably possible after the party becomes aware of the 
Performance Factor. The Notice will: 

(1) describe the Performance Factor and its actual or anticipated impact; 

(2) include a description of any action the party is undertaking, or plans to 
undertake, to remedy or mitigate the Performance Factor; 

(3) indicate whether the party is requesting a meeting to discuss the 
Performance Factor; and 

(4) address any other issue or matter the party wishes to raise with the 
other party. 

(b) The recipient party will provide a written acknowledgment of receipt of the 
Notice within seven Days of the date on which the Notice was received (“Date of 
the Notice”). 

(c) Where a meeting has been requested under paragraph 7.2(a)(3), the parties 
agree to meet and discuss the Performance Factors within fourteen Days of the 
Date of the Notice, in accordance with the provisions of section 7.3. 

7.3 Performance Meetings During a meeting on performance, the parties will: 

(a) discuss the causes of a Performance Factor; 

(b) discuss the impact of a Performance Factor on the local health system and the 
risk resulting from non-performance; and 


Multi-Sector Service Accountability Agreement April 1,2018 - March 31,2019 


Page 18 of 33 



(c) determine the steps to be taken to remedy or mitigate the impact of the 
Performance Factor (the “Performance Improvement Process”). 

7.4 The Performance Improvement Process. 

(a) The Performance Improvement Process will focus on the risks of non¬ 
performance and problem-solving. It may include one or more of the following 
actions: 

(1) a requirement that the HSP develop and implement an improvement 
plan that is acceptable to the LHIN; 

(2) the conduct of a Review; 

(3) a revision and amendment of the HSP’s obligations; and/or 

(4) an in-year, or year-end, adjustment to the Funding, 

among other possible means of responding to the Performance Factor or 
improving performance. 

(b) Any performance improvement process begun under a prior service 
accountability agreement that was not completed under the prior agreement will 
continue under this Agreement. Any performance improvement required by a 
LHIN under a prior service accountability agreement will be deemed to be a 
requirement of this Agreement until fulfilled or waived by the LHIN. 


ARTICLE 8.0- REPORTING, ACCOUNTING AND REVIEW 


8.1 Reporting. 

(a) Generally. The LHIN’s ability to enable its local health system to provide 
appropriate, co-ordinated, effective and efficient health services, as 
contemplated by LHSIA, is heavily dependent on the timely collection and 
analysis of accurate information. The HSP acknowledges that the timely 
provision of accurate information related to the HSP, and its performance of its 
obligations under this Agreement, is under the HSP’s control. 

(b) Specific Obligations. The HSP: 

(1) will provide to the LHIN, or to such other entity as the LHIN may direct, in 
the form and within the time specified by the LHIN, the Reports, other 
than personal health information as defined in LHSIA, that (1) the LHIN 
requires for the purposes of exercising its powers and duties under this 
Agreement, the Accountability Agreement, LHSIA or for the purposes 
that are prescribed under any Applicable Law; 

(2) will fulfil the specific reporting requirements set out in Schedule C; 


Multi-Sector Service Accountability Agreement April 1,2018 - March 31,2019 


Page 19 of 33 



(3) will ensure that every Report is complete, accurate, signed on behalf of 
the HSP by an authorized signing officer where required and provided in 
a timely manner and in a form satisfactory to the LHIN; and 

(4) agrees that every Report submitted to the LHIN by or on behalf of the 
HSP, will be deemed to have been authorized by the HSP for 
submission. 

For certainty, nothing in this section 8.1 or in this Agreement restricts or 
otherwise limits the LHIN’s right to access or to require access to personal 
health information as defined in LHSIA, in accordance with Applicable Law for 
purposes of carrying out the LHIN’s statutory objects to achieve the purposes of 
LHSIA, including to provide certain services, supplies and equipment in 
accordance with section 5(m.1) of LHSIA and to manage placement of persons 
in accordance with section 5(m.2). 

(c) French Language Services. If the HSP is required to provide services to the 
public in French under the provisions of the French Language Services Act, the 
HSP will be required to submit a French language services report to the LHIN. 

If the HSP is not required to provide services to the public in French under the 
provisions of the French Language Service Act, it will be required to provide a 
report to the LHIN that outlines how the HSP addresses the needs of its local 
Francophone community. 

(d) Declaration of Compliance. Within 90 days of the HSP’s fiscal year-end, the 
Board will issue a Compliance Declaration declaring that the HSP has complied 
with the terms of this Agreement. The form of the declaration is set out in 
Schedule G and may be amended by the LHIN from time to time through the 
term of this Agreement. 

(e) Financial Reductions. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Agreement, 
and at the discretion of the LHIN, the HSP may be subject to a financial 
reduction in any of the following circumstances: 

(1) its CAPS is received after the due date; 

(2) its CAPS is incomplete; 

(3) the quarterly performance reports are not provided when due; or 

(4) financial or clinical data requirements are late, incomplete or inaccurate, 

where the errors or delay were not as a result of LHIN actions or inaction or the 
actions or inactions of persons acting on behalf of the LHIN. If assessed, the 
financial reduction will be as follows: 

(1) if received within 7 days after the due date, incomplete or inaccurate, the 
financial penalty will be the greater of (1) a reduction of 0.02 percent 
(0.02%) of the Funding; or (2) two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00); 
and 


Multi-Sector Service Accountability Agreement April 1,2018 - March 31,2019 


Page 20 of 33 



(2) for every full or partial week of non-compliance thereafter, the rate will 
be one half of the initial reduction. 


8.2 Reviews. 

(a) During the term of this Agreement and for seven years after the term of this 
Agreement, the HSP agrees that the LHIN or its authorized representatives may 
conduct a Review of the HSP to confirm the HSP’s fulfillment of its obligations 
under this Agreement. For these purposes the LHIN or its authorized 
representatives may, upon twenty-four hours’ Notice to the HSP and during 
normal business hours enter the HSP’s premises to: 

(1) inspect and copy any financial records, invoices and other finance- 
related documents, other than personal health information as defined in 
LHSIA, in the possession or under the control of the HSP which relate to 
the Funding or otherwise to the Services; and 

(2) inspect and copy non-financial records, other than personal health 
information as defined in LHSIA, in the possession or under the control 
of the HSP which relate to the Funding, the Services or otherwise to the 
performance of the HSP under this Agreement. 

(b) The cost of any Review will be borne by the HSP if the Review: (1) was made 
necessary because the HSP did not comply with a requirement under LHSIA or 
this Agreement; or (2) indicates that the HSP has not fulfilled its obligations 
under this Agreement, including its obligations under Applicable Law and 
Applicable Policy. 

(c) To assist in respect of the rights set out in (a) above, the HSP shall disclose any 
information requested by the LHIN or its authorized representatives, and shall 
do so in a form requested by the LHIN or its authorized representatives. 

(d) The HSP may not commence a proceeding for damages or otherwise against 
any person with respect to any act done or omitted to be done, any conclusion 
reached or report submitted that is done in good faith in respect of a Review. 

(e) HSP’s obligations under this section 8.2 will survive any termination or 
expiration of this Agreement. 

8.3 Document Retention and Record Maintenance. The HSP will 

(a) retain all records (as that term is defined in FIPPA) related to the HSP’s 
performance of its obligations under this Agreement for seven years after the 
termination or expiration of the term of this Agreement. The HSP’s obligations 
under this section will survive any termination or expiry of this Agreement; 

(b) keep all financial records, invoices and other finance-related documents relating 
to the Funding or otherwise to the Services in a manner consistent with either 


Multi-Sector Service Accountability Agreement April 1,2018 - March 31,2019 


Page 21 of 33 



generally accepted accounting principles or international financial reporting 
standards as advised by the HSP’s auditor; and 

(c) keep all non-financial documents and records relating to the Funding or 
otherwise to the Services in a manner consistent with all Applicable Law. 

8.4 Disclosure of Information. 

(a) FIPPA. The HSP acknowledges that the LHIN is bound by FIPPA and that any 
information provided to the LHIN in connection with this Agreement may be 
subject to disclosure in accordance with FIPPA. 

(b) Confidential Information. The parties will treat Confidential Information as 
confidential and will not disclose Confidential Information except with the 
consent of the disclosing party or as permitted or required under FIPPA or the 
Personal Health Information Protection Act, 2004, LHSIA, court order, subpoena 
or other Applicable Law. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the LHIN may disclose 
information that it collects under this Agreement in accordance with LHSIA. 

8.5 Transparency. The HSP will post a copy of this Agreement and each Compliance 
Declaration submitted to the LHIN during the term of this Agreement in a conspicuous 
and easily accessible public place at its sites of operations to which this Agreement 
applies and on its public website, if the HSP operates a public website. 


8.6 Auditor General. For greater certainty the LHIN’s rights under this article are in 

addition to any rights provided to the Auditor General under the Auditor General Act 
(Ontario). 


ARTICLE 9.0- ACKNOWLEDGEMENT OF LHIN SUPPORT 


9.1 Publication. For the purposes of this Article 9, the term “publication” means any 
material on or concerning the Services that the HSP makes available to the public, 
regardless of whether the material is provided electronically or in hard copy. Examples 
include a web-site, an advertisement, a brochure, promotional documents and a report. 
Materials that are prepared by the HSP in order to fulfil its reporting obligations under 
this Agreement are not included in the term “publication”. 


9.2 Acknowledgment of Funding Support. 

(a) The HSP agrees all publications will include 

(1) an acknowledgment of the Funding provided by the LHIN and the 
Government of Ontario. Prior to including an acknowledgement in any 
publication, the HSP will obtain the LHIN’s approval of the form of 


Multi-Sector Service Accountability Agreement April 1,2018 - March 31,2019 


Page 22 of 33 



acknowledgement. The LHIN may, at its discretion, decide that an 
acknowledgement is not necessary; and 

(2) a statement indicating that the views expressed in the publication are the 
views of the HSP and do not necessarily reflect those of the LHIN or the 
Government of Ontario. 

(b) The HSP shall not use any insignia or logo of Her Majesty the Queen in right of 
Ontario, including those of the LHIN, unless it has received the prior written 
permission of the LHIN to do so. 


ARTICLE 10.0 - REPRESENTATIONS, WARRANTIES AND COVENANTS 


10.1 General. The HSP represents, warrants and covenants that: 

(a) it is, and will continue for the term of this Agreement to be, a validly existing 
legal entity with full power to fulfill its obligations under this Agreement; 

(b) it has the experience and expertise necessary to carry out the Services; 

(c) it holds all permits, licences, consents, intellectual property rights and 
authorities necessary to perform its obligations under this Agreement; 

(d) all information (including information relating to any eligibility requirements for 
Funding) that the HSP provided to the LHIN in support of its request for Funding 
was true and complete at the time the HSP provided it, and will, subject to the 
provision of Notice otherwise, continue to be true and complete for the term of 
this Agreement; and 

(e) it does, and will continue for the term of this Agreement to, operate in 
compliance with all Applicable Law and Applicable Policy, including observing 
where applicable, the requirements of the Corporations Actor successor 
legislation and the HSP's by-laws in respect of, but not limited to, the holding of 
board meetings, the requirements of quorum for decision-making, the 
maintenance of minutes for all board and committee meetings and the holding 
of members meetings. 

10.2 Execution of Agreement. The HSP represents and warrants that: 

(a) it has the full power and authority to enter into this Agreement; and 

(b) it has taken all necessary actions to authorize the execution of this 

Agreement. 


Multi-Sector Service Accountability Agreement April 1,2018 - March 31,2019 


Page 23 of 33 



10.3 Governance. 


(a) The HSP represents, warrants and covenants that it has established, and will 
maintain for the period during which this Agreement is in effect, policies and 
procedures: 

(1) that set out a code of conduct for, and that identify the ethical 
responsibilities for all persons at all levels of the HSP’s organization; 

(2) to ensure the ongoing effective functioning of the HSP; 

(3) for effective and appropriate decision-making; 

(4) for effective and prudent risk-management, including the identification 
and management of potential, actual and perceived conflicts of interest; 

(5) for the prudent and effective management of the Funding; 

(6) to monitor and ensure the accurate and timely fulfillment of the HSP’s 
obligations under this Agreement and compliance with LHSIA; 

(7) to enable the preparation, approval and delivery of all Reports; 

(8) to address complaints about the provision of Services, the management 
or governance of the HSP; and 

(9) to deal with such other matters as the HSP considers necessary to 
ensure that the HSP carries out its obligations under this Agreement. 

(b) The HSP represents and warrants that: 

(1) it has, or will have within 60 days of the execution of this Agreement, a 
Performance Agreement with its CEO that ties the CEO’s compensation 
plan to the CEO’s performance; 

(2) it will take all reasonable care to ensure that its CEO complies with the 
Performance Agreement; 

(3) it will enforce the HSP’s rights under the Performance Agreement; and 

(4) any compensation award provided to the CEO during the term of this 
Agreement will be pursuant to an evaluation of the CEO’s performance 
under the Performance Agreement and the CEO’s achievement of 
performance goals and performance improvement targets and in 
compliance with Applicable Law. 

“compensation award”, for the purposes of Section 10.3(b)(4) above, means all 
forms of payment, benefits and perquisites paid or provided, directly or 
indirectly, to or for the benefit of a CEO who performs duties and functions that 
entitle him or her to be paid. 


Multi-Sector Service Accountability Agreement April 1,2018 - March 31,2019 


Page 24 of 33 



10.4 Funding, Services and Reporting. The HSP represents warrants and covenants that 

(a) the Funding is, and will continued to be, used only to provide the Services in 
accordance with the terms of this Agreement; 

(b) the Services are and will continue to be provided; 

(1) by persons with the expertise, professional qualifications, licensing and 
skills necessary to complete their respective tasks; and 

(2) in compliance with Applicable Law and Applicable Policy; 

(c) every Report is accurate and in full compliance with the provisions of this 
Agreement, including any particular requirements applicable to the Report and 
any material change to a Report will be communicated to the LHIN immediately. 

10.5 Supporting Documentation. Upon request, the HSP will provide the LHIN with proof 
of the matters referred to in this Article. 


ARTiCLE 11.0- LIMITATION OF LIABILITY, INDEMNITY & INSURANCE 


11.1 Limitation of Liabiiity. The Indemnified Parties will not be liable to the HSP or any of 
the HSP’s Personnel and Volunteers for costs, losses, claims, liabilities and damages 
howsoever caused arising out of or in any way related to the Services or otherwise in 
connection with this Agreement, unless caused by the negligence or wilful act of any of 
the Indemnified Parties. 


11.2 Ibid. For greater certainty and without limiting section 11.1, the LHIN is not liable for 
how the HSP and the HSP’s Personnel and Volunteers carry out the Services and is 
therefore not responsible to the HSP for such Services. Moreover the LHIN is not 
contracting with or employing any HSP’s Personnel and Volunteers to carry out the 
terms of this Agreement. As such, it is not liable for contracting with, employing or 
terminating a contract with or the employment of any HSP’s Personnel and Volunteers 
required to carry out this Agreement, nor for the withholding, collection or payment of 
any taxes, premiums, contributions or any other remittances due to government for the 
HSP’s Personnel and Volunteers required by the HSP to carry out this Agreement. 


11.3 Indemnification. The HSP hereby agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the 

Indemnified Parties from and against any and all liability, loss, costs, damages and 
expenses (including legal, expert and consultant costs), causes of action, actions, 
claims, demands, lawsuits or other proceedings (collectively, the “Claims”), by 
whomever made, sustained, brought or prosecuted (including for third party bodily 
injury (including death), personal injury and property damage), in any way based upon, 
occasioned by or attributable to anything done or omitted to be done by the HSP or the 
HSP’s Personnel and Volunteers, in the course of the performance of the HSP’s 


Multi-Sector Service Accountability Agreement April 1,2018 - March 31,2019 


Page 25 of 33 



obligations under, or otherwise in connection with, this Agreement, unless caused by 
the negligence or wilful misconduct of any Indemnified Parties. 


11.4 Insurance. 

(a) Generally. The HSP shall protect itself from and against all claims that might 
arise from anything done or omitted to be done by the HSP and the HSP’s 
Personnel and Volunteers under this Agreement and more specifically all claims 
that might arise from anything done or omitted to be done under this Agreement 
where bodily injury (including personal injury), death or property damage, 
including loss of use of property is caused. 

(b) Required Insurance. The HSP will put into effect and maintain, with insurers 
having a secure A.M. Best rating of B+ or greater, or the equivalent, all 
necessary and appropriate insurance that a prudent person in the business of 
the HSP would maintain, including, but not limited to, the following at its own 
expense: 

(1) Commercial General Liability Insurance, for third party bodily injury, 
personal injury and property damage to an inclusive limit of not less than 
two million dollars per occurrence and not less than two million dollars 
products and completed operations aggregate. The policy will include 
the following clauses: 

a. The Indemnified Parties as additional insureds; 

b. Contractual Liability; 

c. Cross-Liability; 

d. Products and Completed Operations Liability; 

e. Employers Liability and Voluntary Compensation unless the HSP 
complies with the Section below entitled “Proof of WSIA 
Coverage”; 

f. Tenants Legal Liability; (for premises/building leases only); 

g. Non-Owned automobile coverage with blanket contractual 
coverage for hired automobiles; and, 

h. A thirty-Day written notice of cancellation, termination or material 
change. 

(2) Proof of WSIA Coverage. Unless the HSP puts into effect and maintains 
Employers Liability and Voluntary Compensation as set out above, the 
HSP will provide the LHIN with a valid Workplace Safety and Insurance 
Act, 1997 (WSIA) Clearance Certificate and any renewal replacements, 
and will pay all amounts required to be paid to maintain a valid WSIA 
Clearance Certificate throughout the term of this Agreement. 

(3) All Risk Property Insurance on property of every description, for the 
term, providing coverage to a limit of not less than the full replacement 
cost, including earthquake and flood. All reasonable deductibles and 
self-insured retentions are the responsibility of the HSP. 

(4) Comprehensive Crime insurance. Disappearance, Destruction and 
Dishonest coverage. 


Multi-Sector Service Accountability Agreement April 1,2018 - March 31,2019 


Page 26 of 33 



(5) Errors and Omissions Liability Insurance insuring liability for errors and 
omissions in the provision of any professional services as part of the 
Services or failure to perform any such professional services, in the 
amount of not less than two million dollars per claim and in the annual 
aggregate. 

(c) Certificates of Insurance. The HSP will provide the LHIN with proof of the 
insurance required by this Agreement in the form of a valid certificate of 
insurance that references this Agreement and confirms the required coverage, 
on or before the commencement of this Agreement, and renewal replacements 
on or before the expiry of any such insurance. Upon the request of the LHIN, a 
copy of each insurance policy shall be made available to it. The HSP shall 
ensure that each of its subcontractors obtains all the necessary and appropriate 
insurance that a prudent person in the business of the subcontractor would 
maintain and that the Indemnified Parties are named as additional insureds with 
respect to any liability arising in the course of performance of the 
subcontractor's obligations under the subcontract. 


ARTICLE 12.0- TERMINATION OF AGREEMENT 


12.1 Termination by the LHIN. 

(a) Without Cause. The LHIN may terminate this Agreement at any time, for any 
reason, upon giving at least sixty Days’ Notice to the HSP. 

(b) Where No Appropriation. If, as provided for in section 4.3, the LHIN does not 
receive the necessary funding from the MOHLTC, the LHIN may terminate this 
Agreement immediately by giving Notice to the HSP. 

(c) For Cause. The LHIN may terminate this Agreement immediately upon giving 
Notice to the HSP if: 

(1) in the opinion of the LHIN: 

a. the HSP has knowingly provided false or misleading information 
regarding its funding request or in any other communication with 
the LHIN; 

b. the HSP breaches any material provision of this Agreement; 

c. the HSP is unable to provide or has discontinued the Services; or 

d. it is not reasonable for the HSP to continue to provide the 
Services; 

(2) the nature of the HSP’s business, or its corporate status, changes so 
that it no longer meets the applicable eligibility requirements of the 
program under which the LHIN provides the Funding; 

(3) the HSP makes an assignment, proposal, compromise, or arrangement 
for the benefit of creditors, or is petitioned into bankruptcy, or files for the 
appointment of a receiver; or 


Multi-Sector Service Accountability Agreement April 1,2018 - March 31,2019 


Page 27 of 33 



(4) the HSP ceases to carry on business. 

(d) Material Breach. A breach of a material provision of this Agreement includes, 
but is not limited to: 

(1) misuse of Funding; 

(2) a failure or inability to provide the Services as set out in the Service 
Plan; 

(3) a failure to provide the Compliance Declaration; 

(4) a failure to implement, or follow, a Performance Agreement, 

Performance Improvement Process or a Transition Plan; 

(5) a failure to respond to LHIN requests in a timely manner; 

(6) a failure to: A) advise the LHIN of actual, potential or perceived Conflict 
of Interest; or B) comply with any requirements prescribed by the LHIN 
to resolve a Conflict of Interest; and 

(7) a Conflict of Interest that cannot be resolved. 

(e) Transition Pian. In the event of termination by the LHIN pursuant to this 
section, the LHIN and the HSP will develop a Transition Plan. The HSP agrees 
that it will take all actions, and provide all information, required by the LHIN to 
facilitate the transition of the HSP’s clients. 

12.2 Termination by the HSP. 

(a) The HSP may terminate this Agreement at any time, for any reason, upon giving 
six months’ Notice (or such shorter period as may be agreed by the HSP and 
the LHIN) to the LHIN provided that the Notice is accompanied by: 

(1) satisfactory evidence that the HSP has taken all necessary actions to 
authorize the termination of this Agreement; and 

(2) a Transition Plan, acceptable to the LHIN, that indicates how the needs 
of the HSP’s clients will be met following the termination and how the 
transition of the clients to new service providers will be effected within 
the six month Notice period. 

(b) In the event that the HSP fails to provide an acceptable Transition Plan, the 
LHIN may reduce Funding payable to the HSP prior to termination of this 
Agreement to compensate the LHIN for transition costs. 

12.3 Opportunity to Remedy. 

(a) Opportunity to Remedy. If the LHIN considers that it is appropriate to allow 
the HSP an opportunity to remedy a breach of this Agreement, the LHIN may 


Multi-Sector Service Accountability Agreement April 1,2018 - March 31,2019 


Page 28 of 33 



give the HSP an opportunity to remedy the breach by giving the HSP Notice of 
the particulars of the breach and of the period of time within which the HSP is 
required to remedy the breach. The Notice will also advise the HSP that the 
LHIN will terminate this Agreement: 

(1) at the end of the Notice period provided for in the Notice if the HSP fails 
to remedy the breach within the time specified in the Notice; or 

(2) prior to the end of the Notice period provided for in the Notice if it 
becomes apparent to the LHIN that the HSP cannot completely remedy 
the breach within that time or such further period of time as the LHIN 
considers reasonable, or the HSP is not proceeding to remedy the 
breach in a way that is satisfactory to the LHIN. 

(b) Failure to Remedy. If the LHIN has provided the HSP with an opportunity to 
remedy the breach, and: 

(1) the HSP does not remedy the breach within the time period specified in 
the Notice; 

(2) it becomes apparent to the LHIN that the HSP cannot completely 
remedy the breach within the time specified in the Notice or such further 
period of time as the LHIN considers reasonable; or 

(3) the HSP is not proceeding to remedy the breach in a way that is 
satisfactory to the LHIN, 

(c) then the LHIN may immediately terminate this Agreement by giving Notice of 
termination to the HSP. 

12.4 Consequences of Termination. 

(a) If this Agreement is terminated pursuant to this Article, the LHIN may: 

(1) cancel all further Funding instalments; 

(2) demand the repayment of any Funding remaining in the possession or 
under the control of the HSP; 

(3) determine the HSP’s reasonable costs to wind down the Services; and 

(4) permit the HSP to offset the costs determined pursuant to section (3), 
against the amount owing pursuant to section (2). 

12.5 Effective Date. Termination under this Article will take effect as set out in the Notice. 


1 2.6 Corrective Action. Despite its right to terminate this Agreement pursuant to this 

Article, the LHIN may choose not to terminate this Agreement and may take whatever 
corrective action it considers necessary and appropriate, including suspending Funding 


Multi-Sector Service Accountability Agreement April 1,2018 - March 31,2019 


Page 29 of 33 



for such period as the LHIN determines, to ensure the successful completion of the 
Services in accordance with the terms of this Agreement. 


ARTICLE 13.0- NOTICE 


13.1 Notice. A Notice will be in writing; delivered personally, by pre-paid courier, by any 
form of mail where evidence of receipt is provided by the post office, or by facsimile 
with confirmation of receipt, or by email where no delivery failure notification has been 
received. For certainty, delivery failure notification includes an automated ‘out of office’ 
notification. A Notice will be addressed to the other party as provided below or as 
either party will later designate to the other in writing: 

To the LHIN; 

Champlain LHIN 

1900 City Park Drive, Suite 204 

Ottawa, ON K1J 1 A3 

Attention: Wendy Grimshaw 

Vice President, Performance, Accountability & Corporate Services and CFO 
Email: ch.accountabilitvteam@lhins.on.ca 
Fax: 613-745-1928 
Telephone: 613-747-6784 

To the HSP: 

Sandy Hill Community Health Centre 
221 Nelson Street 
Ottawa, ON K1N 1C7 

Attention: David Gibson 
Executive Director 

Email: daibson(5)sandvhillchc.on.ca 
Telephone: 613-789-1500 Ext. 2506 
Fax: 613-789-7962 


13.2 Notices Effective From. A Notice will be deemed to have been duly given one 

business day after delivery if the Notice is delivered personally, by pre-paid courier or 
by mail. A Notice that is delivered by facsimile with confirmation of receipt or by email 


Multi-Sector Service Accountability Agreement April 1,2018 - March 31,2019 


Page 30 of 33 




where no delivery failure notification has been received will be deemed to have been 
duly given one business day after the facsimile or email was sent. 


ARTICLE 14.0- ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS 


14.1 Interpretation. In the event of a conflict or inconsistency in any provision of this 
Agreement, the main body of this Agreement will prevail over the Schedules. 

14.2 Invalidity or Unenforceability of Any Provision. The invalidity or unenforceability of 
any provision of this Agreement will not affect the validity or enforceability of any other 
provision of this Agreement and any invalid or unenforceable provision will be deemed 
to be severed. 


14.3 Waiver. A party may only rely on a waiver of the party’s failure to comply with any term 
of this Agreement if the other party has provided a written and signed Notice of waiver. 
Any waiver must refer to a specific failure to comply and will not have the effect of 
waiving any subsequent failures to comply. 


14.4 Parties Independent. The parties are and will at all times remain independent of each 
other and are not and will not represent themselves to be the agent, joint venturer, 
partner or employee of the other. No representations will be made or acts taken by 
either party which could establish or imply any apparent relationship of agency, joint 
venture, partnership or employment and neither party will be bound in any manner 
whatsoever by any agreements, warranties or representations made by the other party 
to any other person or entity, nor with respect to any other action of the other party. 


14.5 LHIN is an Agent of the Crown. The parties acknowledge that the LHIN is an agent of 
the Crown and may only act as an agent of the Crown in accordance with the 
provisions of LHSIA. Notwithstanding anything else in this Agreement, any express or 
implied reference to the LHIN providing an indemnity or any other form of indebtedness 
or contingent liability that would directly or indirectly increase the indebtedness or 
contingent liabilities of the LHIN or of Ontario, whether at the time of execution of this 
Agreement or at any time during the term of this Agreement, will be void and of no legal 
effect. 


14.6 Express Rights and Remedies Not Limited. The express rights and remedies of the 
LHIN are in addition to and will not limit any other rights and remedies available to the 
LHIN at law or in equity. For further certainty, the LHIN has not waived any provision of 
any applicable statute, including LHSIA, nor the right to exercise its rights under these 
statutes at any time. 


14.7 No Assignment. The HSP will not assign this Agreement or the Funding in whole or in 
part, directly or indirectly, without the prior written consent of the LHIN. No assignment 


Multi-Sector Service Accountability Agreement April 1,2018 - March 31,2019 


Page 31 of 33 



or subcontract shall relieve the HSP from its obligations under this Agreement or 
impose any liability upon the LHIN to any assignee or subcontractor. The LHIN may 
assign this Agreement or any of its rights and obligations under this Agreement to any 
one or more of the LHINs or to the MOHLTC. 


14.8 Governing Law. This Agreement and the rights, obligations and relations of the parties 
hereto will be governed by and construed in accordance with the laws of the Province 
of Ontario and the federal laws of Canada applicable therein. Any litigation arising in 
connection with this Agreement will be conducted in Ontario unless the parties agree in 
writing otherwise. 


14.9 Survival. The provisions in Articles 1.0, 5.0, 8.0, 10.5, 11.0, 13.0, 14.0 and 15.0 will 
continue in full force and effect for a period of seven years from the date of expiry or 
termination of this Agreement. 


14.10 Further Assurances. The parties agree to do or cause to be done all acts or things 
necessary to implement and carry into effect this Agreement to its full extent. 


14.11 Amendment of Agreement. This Agreement may only be amended by a written 
agreement duly executed by the parties. 

14.12 Counterparts. This Agreement may be executed in any number of counterparts, each 
of which will be deemed an original, but all of which together will constitute one and the 
same instrument. 


ARTICLE 15.0- ENTIRE AGREEMENT 


15.1 Entire Agreement. This is Agreement forms the entire Agreement between the parties 
and supersedes all prior oral or written representations and agreements, except that 
where the LHIN has provided Funding to the HSP pursuant to an amendment to the 
Multi-Sector Accountability Agreement April 1,2014 to March 31,2018 or to this 
Agreement, whether by Project Funding Agreement or otherwise, and an amount of 
Funding for the same purpose is set out in the Schedules, that Funding is subject to all 
of the terms and conditions on which funding for that purpose was initially provided, 
unless those terms and conditions have been superseded by any terms or conditions of 
this Agreement or by the MSAA Indicator Technical Specifications document, or unless 
they conflict with Applicable Law or Applicable Policy. 


Multi-Sector Service Accountability Agreement April 1,2018 - March 31,2019 


Page 32 of 33 



The parties have executed this Agreement on the dates set out below. 


CHAMPLAIN LOCAL HEALTH INTEGRATION NETWORK 

By: 

Jean-Pierre Boisclair April 20, 2018 

Jean-Pierre Boisclair, Chair Date 

And by: 


Chantale LeClerc April 18, 2018 

Chantale LeClerc, CEO Date 


Sandy Hill Community Health Centre 

By: 

Lynn Marchildon March 15, 2018 

Lynn Marchildon, Board President Date 

I have authority to bind the HSP 
And by: 


David Gibson March 15, 2018 

David Gibson, Date 

Executive Director 

I have authority to bind the HSP 


Multi-Sector Service Accountability Agreement April 1,2018 - March 31,2019 


Page 33 of 33 



Schedule Bl: Total LHIN Funding 

2018-2019 

Health Service Provider: Sandy Hill Community Health Centre 


LHIN Program Revenue & Expenses 

Row 

# 

Account: Financial (F) Reference OHRS VERSION 10.0 

2018-2019 
Plan Target 

REVENUE 

LHIN Global Base Allocation 

1 

F11006 

$9,729,274 

HBAM Funding (CCAC only) 

2 

F11005 

$0 

Quality-Based Procedures (CCAC only) 

3 

F 11004 

$0 

MOHLTC Base Allocation 

4 

F 11010 

$0 

MOHLTC Other funding envelopes 

5 

F 11014 

$0 

LHIN One Time 

6 

F11008 

$0 

MOHLTC One Time 

7 

F 11012 

$0 

Paymaster Flow Through 

8 

F 11019 

$0 

Service Recipient Revenue 

9 

F 11050 to 11090 

$0 

Subtotal Revenue LHIN/MOHLTC 

10 

Sum of Rows 1 to 9 

$9,729,274 

Recoveries from External/Internal Sources 

11 

F 120* 

$0 

Donations 

12 

F 140* 

$0 

Other Funding Sources & Other Revenue 

13 

F 130* to 190*, 110*, [excl. F 11006, 11008, 11010, 11012, 11014, 11019, 11050 
to 11090, 131*, 140*, 141*, 151*1 

$49,275 

Subtotal Other Revenues 

14 

Sum of Rows 11 to 13 

$49,275 

TOTAL REVENUE FUND TYPE 2 

15 

Sum of Rows 10 and 14 

$9,778,549 

EXPENSES 

Compensation 

Salaries (Worked hours -i- Benefit hours cost) 

17 

F 31010, 31030, 31090, 35010, 35030, 35090 

$4,640,792 

Benefit Contributions 

18 

F 31040 to 31085,35040 to 35085 

$1,087,509 

Employee Future Benefit Compensation 

19 

F305* 

$0 

Physician Compensation 

20 

F390* 

$1,956,835 

Physician Assistant Compensation 

21 

F390* 

$0 

Nurse Practitioner Compensation 

22 

F380* 

$601,966 

Physiotherapist Compensation (Row 128) 

23 

F350* 

$0 

Chiropractor Compensation (Row 129) 

24 

F390* 

$0 

All Other Medical Staff Compensation 

25 

F390*, fexcl. F 39092] 

$0 

Sessional Fees 

26 

F 39092 

$0 

Service Costs 

Med/Surgical Supplies & Drugs 

27 

F 460*, 465*, 560*, 565* 

$109,786 

Supplies & Sundry Expenses 

28 

F4*, 5*, 6*, 

[excl. F 460*, 465*, 560*, 565*, 69596, 69571,72000, 62800, 45100, 69700] 

$684,541 

Community One Time Expense 

29 

F 69596 

$0 

Equipment Expenses 

30 

F 7*, [excl. F 750*, 780* ] 

$100,672 

Amortization on Major Equip, Software License & Fees 

31 

F 750*,780* 

$0 

Contracted Out Expense 

32 

F8* 

$311,306 

Buildings & Grounds Expenses 

33 

F 9*, [excl. F 950*1 

$285,142 

Building Amortization 

34 

F9* 

$0 

TOTAL EXPENSES FUND TYPE 2 

35 

Sum of Rows 17 to 34 

$9,778,549 

NET SURPLUS/(DEFICIT) FROM OPERATIONS 

36 

Row 15 minus Row 35 $0 

Amortization - Grants/Donations Revenue 

37 

F 131*, 141* & 151* I $0 

SURPLUS/DEFICIT Incl. Amortization of Grants/Donations 

38 

Sum of Rows 36 to 37 $0 

FUND TYPE 3-OTHER 

Total Revenue (Type 3) 

39 

F 1* 

$2,955,650 

Total Expenses (Type 3) 

40 

F 3*, F 4*, F 5*, F 6*, F 7*, F 8*, F 9* 

$2,955,650 

NETSURPLUS/(DEFICIT) FUND TYPE 3 

41 

Row 39 minus Row 40 $0 

FUND TYPE 1 - HOSPITAL 

Total Revenue (Type 1) 

42 

F 1* 

$0 

Total Expenses (Type 1) 

43 

F 3*, F 4*, F 5*, F 6*, F 7*, F 8*, F 9* 

$0 

NETSURPLUS/(DEFICIT) FUND TYPE 1 

44 

Row 42 minus Row 43 $0 

ALL FUND TYPES 

Total Revenue (All Funds) 

45 

Line 15 -i- line 39 -i- line 42 

$12,734,199 

Total Expenses (All Funds) 

46 

Line 16 -i- line 40 -i- line 43 

$12,734,199 

NET SURPLUS/(DEFICIT) ALL FUND TYPES 

47 

Row 45 minus Row 46 $0 

Total Admin Expenses Allocated to the TPBEs 

Undistributed Accounting Centres 

48 

82* 

$0 

Plant Operations 

49 

72 1* 

$350,098 

Volunteer Services 

50 

72 1* 

$0 

Information Systems Support 

51 

72 1* 

$633,075 

General Administration 

52 

72 1* 

$1,043,722 

Other Administrative Expenses 

53 

72 1* 

$0 

Admin & Support Services 

54 

72 1* 

$2,026,895 

Management Clinical Services 

55 

72 5 05 

$62,448 

Medical Resources 

56 

72 5 07 

$0 

Total Admin & Undistributed Expenses 

57 

Sum of Rows 48, 54, 55-56 (included in Fund Type 2 expenses above) 

$2,089,343 



































Schedule B2: Clinical Activity- Summary 
2018-2019 


Health Service Provider: Sandy Hill Community Health Centre 











Schedule C: Reports 

Community Health Centres 

2018-2019 

Health Service Provider: Sandy Hill Community Health Centre 





Only thosB requirements listed below that relate to the programs and services that are 
funded by the LHIN will be applicable. 


A list of reporting requirements and related submission dates is set out below. Unless otherwise 
indicated, the HSP is onty required to provide information that is related to the funding that is 
provided under this Agreement. Reports that require full entity reporting are followed by an 
asterisk 


OHRS/MIS Trial Balance Submission (through OHFS) 



2014-15 

Due Dates (Must pass 3c Edits) 



2014-15 Q1 

Not required 2014-15 



2014-15 Q2 

October 31, 2014 



2014-15 Q3 

January 31. 2015 



2014-15 Q4 

May 30. 2015 



2015-16 

Due Dates (Must pass 3c Edits) 



2015-16 Q1 

Not required 2015-16 



2015-16 Q2 

October 31. 2015 



2015-16 Q3 

January 31. 2016 



2015-16 Q4 

May 31. 2016 



2016-17 

Due Dates (Must pass 3c Edits) 



2016-17 Q1 

Not required 2016-17 



2016-17 Q2 

October 31, 2016 



2016-17 Q3 

January 31, 2017 



2016-17 Q4 

May 31. 2017 



2017-18 

Due Dates (Must pass 3c Edits) 



2017-18 Q1 

Not required 2017-18 



2017-18 Q2 

October 31, 2017 



2017-18 Q3 

January 31, 2018 



2017-18 Q4 

May 31, 2018 



2018-19 

Due Dates (Must pass 3c Edits) 



2018-19 Q1 

Not required 2018-19 



2018-19 Q2 

October 31, 2018 



2018-19 Q3 

January 31. 2019 



2018-19 Q4 

May 31. 2019 


•i* 




Supplementary Reporting - Quarterly Report (through SRI) 



2014-15 

Due five (5) business days following Trial Balance 
Submission Due Date 



2014-15 Q2 

November 7. 2014 



2014-15 Q3 

February 7, 2015 



2014-15 Q4 

June 7, 2015 — Supplementary Reporting Due 



2015-16 

Due five (5) business days following Trial Balance 
Submission Due Date 



2015-16 Q2 

November 7, 2015 



2015-16 Q3 

February 7, 2016 



2015-16 Q4 

June 7, 2016 — Supplementary Reporting Due 



2016-17 

Due five (5) business days following Trial Balance 
Submission Due Date 



2016-17 Q2 

November 7, 2016 



2016-17 Q3 

February 7. 2017 



2016-17 Q4 

June 7, 2017- Supplementary Reporting Due 






































































Schedule C: Reports 

Community Health Centres 

2018-2019 

Health Service Provider: Sandy Hill Community Health Centre 


2017-18 

Due five (5) business days following Trial Balance 
Submission Due Date 

2017-18 Q2 

November 7. 2017 

2017-18 Q3 

February 7, 2018 

2017-18 Q4 

June 7, 2018— Supplementary Reporting Due 

2018-19 

Due five (5) business days following Trial Balance 
Submission Due Date 

2018-19 Q2 

November 7, 2018 

2018-19 Q3 

February 7, 2019 

2018-19 Q4 

June 7, 2019 — Supplementary Reporting Due 


Annual Reconciliation Report (ARR) through SRI and paper copy submission* 

(All HSPs must submit both paper copy ARR submission, duly signed, to the Ministry 
and the respective LHIN where funding is provided; soft copy to be provided through 

SRI) 


Fiscal Year 

Due Date 

2014-15 

June 30, 2015 

2015-16 

June 30. 2016 

2016-17 

June 30, 2017 

2017-18 

June 30, 2018 

2018-19 

June 30, 2019 


Board Approved Audited Financial Statements * 

(All HSPs must submit a paper copy Board Approved Audited Financial Statements, 
duly signed, to the Ministey and the respective LHIN where funding is provided.) 

Fiscal Year 

Due Date 

2014-15 

June 30, 2015 

2015-16 

June 30, 2016 

2016-17 

June 30, 2017 

2017-18 

June 30, 2018 

2018-19 

June 30. 2019 


Declaration of Compliance 

Fiscal Year 

Due Date 

2013-14 

June 30, 2014 

2014-15 

June 30, 2015 

2015-16 

June 30, 2016 

2016-17 

June 30. 2017 

2017-18 

June 30, 2018 

2018-19 

June 30. 2019 


Community Health Centres — Other Reporting Reguirements 

Reguirement 

Due Date 

French Language Service Report 

2014-15 

April 30, 2015 

2015-16 

April 30, 2016 

2016-17 

April 30. 2017 


2017-18 

April 30, 2018 

2018-19 

April 30. 2019 

Quality Improvement Plan 

The HSP will submit annually a Quality Improvement Plan to Health Quality Ontario that 
is aligned with this Agreement and supports local health system priorities. A copy of 
the QIP is to be provided to the LHIN at the time it is submitted to HQO. 

Planning Period 

Due Date 

April 1.2016- March 31. 2017 

April 1, 2016 

April 1, 2017- March 31. 2018 

April 1, 2017 

April 1. 2018- March 31, 2019 

April 1, 2018 

April 1, 2019 - March 31, 2020 

April 1, 2019 
















































































Schedule C: Reports 

Community Mental Health and Addictions Services 

2018-2019 

Health Service Provider: Sandy Hill Community Health Centre 



Only those requirements listed below that relate to the programs and services that 
are funded by the LHIN will be applicable. 



A list of reporting requirements and related submission dates is set out below. Unless 
otherwise indicated, the HSP is only required to provide information that is related to the 
funding that is provided under this Agreement. Reports that require full entity reporting 
are followed by an asterisk 



OHRS/MIS Trial Balance Submission (through OHFS) 


2014-15 

Due Dates (Must pass 3c Edits) 

2014-15 Q1 

Not required 2014-15 

2014-15 Q2 

October 31, 2014 

2014-15 Q3 

January 31. 2015 

2014-15 Q4 

May 30, 2015 

2015-16 

Due Dates (Must pass 3c Edits) 

2015-16 Q1 

Not required 2015-16 

2015-16 Q2 

October 31, 2015 

2015-16 Q3 

January 31. 2016 

2015-16 Q4 

May 31,2016 

2016-17 

Due Dates (Must pass 3c Edits) 

2016-17 Q1 

Not required 2016-17 

2016-17 Q2 

October 31. 2016 

2016-17 Q3 

January 31. 2017 

2016-17 Q4 

May 31, 2017 

2017-18 

Due Dates (Must pass 3c Edits) 

2017-18 Q1 

Not required 2017-18 

2017-18 Q2 

October 31. 2017 

2017-18 Q3 

January 31. 2018 

2017-18 Q4 

May 31,2018 

2018-19 

Due Dates (Must pass 3c Edits) 

2018-19 Q1 

Not required 2017-18 

2018-19 Q2 

October 31, 2018 

2018-19 Q3 

January 31. 2019 

2018-19 Q4 

May 31. 2019 





Supplementary Reporting - Quarterly Report (through SRI) 


2014-15 

Due five (5) business days following Trial 
Balance Submission Due Date 

2014-15 Q2 

November 7, 2014 

2014-15 Q3 

February 7, 2015 

2014-15 Q4 

June 7, 2015 - Supplementary Reporting Due 

2015-16 

Due five (5) business days following Trial 
Balance Submission Due Date 

2015-16 Q2 

November 7, 2015 

2015-16 Q3 

February 7, 2016 

2015-16 Q4 

June 7, 2016 - Supplementary Reporting Due 

2016-17 

Due five (5) business days following Trial 
Balance Submission Due Date 

2016-17 Q2 

November 7, 2016 

2016-17 Q3 

February 7, 2017 

2016-17 Q4 

June 7. 2017 - SuDolementarv Reportina Due 





























































Schedule C: Reports 

Community Mental Health and Addictions Services 

2018-2019 

Health Service Provider: Sandy Hill Community Health Centre 



2017-18 

Due five (5) business days following Trial 
Balance Submission Due Date 


2017-18 Q2 

November 7, 2017 

2017-18 Q3 

February 7, 2018 

2017-18 Q4 

June 7, 2018 - Supplementary Reporting Due 

2018-19 

Due five (5) business days following Trial 
Balance Submission Due Date 

2018-19 Q2 

November 7, 2018 

2018-19 Q3 

February 7, 2019 

2018-19 Q4 

June 7, 2019 - Supplementary Reporting Due 





Annual Reconciliation Report (ARR) through SRI and paper copy submission* 

(All HSPs must submit both paper copy ARR submission, duly signed, to the 
Ministry and the respective LHIN where funding is provided; soft copy to be 
provided through SRI) 


Fiscal Year 

Due Date 

2014-15 

June 30, 2015 

2015-16 

June 30. 2016 

2016-17 

June 30, 2017 

2017-18 

June 30, 2018 

2018-19 

June 30, 2019 





Board Approved Audited Financial Statements * 

(All HSPs must submit paper copy Board Approved Audited Financial 

Statements, duly signed, to the Ministry and the respective LHIN where funding is 
provided.) 


Fiscal Year 

Due Date 

2014-15 

June 30, 2015 

2015-16 

June 30, 2016 

2016-17 

June 30, 2017 

2017-18 

June 30, 2018 

2018-19 

June 30, 2019 





Declaration of Compliance 


Fiscal Year 

Due Date 

2013-14 

June 30, 2014 

2014-15 

June 30, 2015 

2015-16 

June 30, 2016 

2016-17 

June 30, 2017 

2017-18 

June 30, 2018 

2018-19 

June 30. 2019 





Community Mental Health and Addictions — Other Reporting Reguirements 


Reguirement 

Due Date 

Common Data Set for Community 
Mental Health Services 

Last day of one month following the close of trial 
balance reporting for Q2 and Q4 (Year-End) 

2014-15 Q2 

November 28, 2014 

2014-15 Q4 

June 30, 2015 

2015-16 Q2 

November 30. 2015 

2015-16 Q4 

June 30, 2016 

2016-17 Q2 

November 30. 2016 







































































Schedule C: Reports 

Community Mental Health and Addictions Services 

2018-2019 

Health Service Provider: Sandy Hill Community Health Centre 




2016-17 Q4 

June 30. 2017 

2017-18 Q2 

November 30, 2017 

2017-18 Q4 

June 29, 2018 

2018-19 Q2 

November 30, 2018 

2018-19 Q4 

June 28, 2019 

DATIS (Drug & Alcohol Treatment 
Information System) 

Fifteen (15) business days after end of Q1, Q2 
and Q3 - Twenty (20) business days after Year- 
End (Q4) 

2014-15 Q1 

July 22, 2014 

2014-15 Q2 

October 22. 2014 

2014-15 Q3 

January 22. 2015 

2014-15 Q4 

April 30, 2015 

2015-16 Q1 

July 22. 2015 

2015-16 Q2 

October 22, 2015 

2015-16 Q3 

January 22. 2016 

2015-16 Q4 

April 28, 2016 

2016-17 Q1 

July 22, 2016 

2016-17 Q2 

October 24. 2016 

2016-17 Q3 

January 23. 2017 

2016-17 Q4 

May 2, 2017 

2017-18 Q1 

July 21, 2017 

2017-18 Q2 

October 24. 2017 

2017-18 Q3 

January 23. 2018 

2017-18 Q4 

May 2, 2018 

2018-19 Q1 

July 23, 2018 

2018-19 Q2 

October 22, 2018 

2018-19 Q3 

January 22. 2019 

2018-19 Q4 

April 29, 2019 

ConnexOntarfo Health Services 
Information 

• Drug and Alcohol Helpline 

• Ontario Problem Gambling 
Helpline (OPGH) 

• Mental Health Helpline 

All HSPs that received funding to provide mental 
health and/or addictions services must 
oarticioate in ConnexOntario Health Services 
information’s annual validation of service 
details; provide service availability updates; and 
inform ConnexOntario Health Services 

Information of any program/service changes as 
they occur. 

French Language Service Report 

2014-15 

April 30, 2015 

2015-16 

April 30, 2016 

2016-17 

April 30, 2017 

2017-18 

April 30, 2018 

2018-19 

April 30, 2019 






















































Schedule D: Directives, Guidelines and Policies 

Community Health Centres 

2018-2019 

Health Service Provider: Sandy Hill Community Health Centre 


Only those requirements listed below that relate to the programs and services that are funded 
by the LHIN will be applicable. 


■ Community Financial Policy, 2016 

• Community Health Centre - Requirements November 2013 

• Ontario Healthcare Reporting Standards - OHRS/MIS - most current version available 
to applicable year 

- Model of Health and Wellbeing - May 2013 

• Community Health Centre Guidelines November 2013 vl.1 (see Note #1) 

• Guideline for Community Health Service Providers Audits and Reviews, August 2012 


Note #1: Community Health Centre Guidelines 

A “Community Health Centre Guidelines” document has been completed by representatives from 
Community Health Centres, LHINs, AOHC and the MOHLTC. The purpose of the guide is to 
provide critical information to CHCs and LHINs in the areas of; 

• Historical information 

• Best practice 

• Administrative guidance 

The guide is intended to be a “living" document to be updated during the life of the current 
agreement at a mutually agreeable schedule to all parties to ensure that it remains current and a 
valuable reference document for the CHC sector and LHI Ns. It must be noted that the document 
is considered a guide only for informational purposes and is not a contractual requirement. 






















Schedule D: Directives, Guidelines and Policies 

Community Mental Health and Addictions Services 

2018-2019 

Health Service Provider: Sandy Hill Community Health Centre 


Only those requirements listed below that relate to the programs and services that are 
funded by the LHIN will be applicable. 


• Community Financial Policy, 2016 


• Operating Manual for 

Chapter 1. Organizational Components 

Community Mental 

1.2 

Organizational Structure, Roles and Relationships 

Health and Addiction 

1.3 

Developing and Maintaining the HSP Organization / 

Services (2003) 


Structure 


1.5 

Dispute Resolution 


Chapter 2. Program & Administrative Components 


2.3 

Budget Allocations/ Problem Gambling Budget 



Allocations 


2.4 

Service Provision Requirements 


2.5 

Client Records, Confidentiality and Disclosure 


2.6 

Service Reporting Requirements 


2.8 

Issues Management 


2.9 

Service Evaluation/Quality Assurance 


2.10 

Administrative Expectations 


Chapter 3. Financial Record Keeping and Reporting 



Requirements 


3.2 

Personal Needs Allowance for Clients in Some 



Residential Addictions Programs 


3.6 

Internal Financial Controls (except “Inventory of 



Assets’) 


3.7 

Human Resource Control 


■ Early Psychosis Intervention Standards (March 2011) 


■ Ontario Program Standards for ACT Teams (2005) 

• Intensive Case Management Service Standards for Mental Health Services and 

Supports (2005) _ 

• Crisis Response Service Standards for Mental Health Services and Supports 

_12005)_ 

• Psychiatric Sessional Funding Guidelines (2004) 

• Joint Policy Guideline for the Provision of Community Mental Health and 
Developmental Services for Adults with Dual Diagnosis (2008) 

■ Addictions & Mental Health Ontario - Ontario Provincial Withdrawal Management 
Standards(2014) 

■ Addictions staged screening and assessment tools (2015) 

■ South Oaks Gambling Screen (SOGS) 

• Ontario Healthcare Reporting Standards - OHRS/MIS - most current version 
available to applicable year 

■ Guideline for Community Health Service Providers Audits and Reviews, August 
2012 



























Schedule El: Core Indicators 

2018-2019 

Health Service Provider: Sandy Hill Community Health Centre 


Performance Indicators 


‘Balanced Budget - Fund Type 2 


Proportion of Budget Spent on Administration 


‘Percentage Total Margin 


Variance Forecast to Actual Expenditures 


Variance Forecast to Actual Units of Service 


Service Activity by Functional Centre 


Number of Individuals Served 


Alternate Level of Care (ALC) Rate 


2018-2019 

Target 



Refer to 
Schedule E2a 


Refer to 
Schedule E2a 



Performance 

Standard 





Explanatory Indicators 


Cost per Unit Service (by Functional Centre) 


Cost per Individual Served (by Program/Service/Functional Centre) 


Client Experience 


Percentage of Alternate Level of Care (ALC) days (closed cases) 


Balanced Budget Fund Type 2: FISP's are required to submit a balanced budget 
* No negative variance is accepted for Total Margin 


































Schedule E2a: Clinical Activity- Detail 

2018-2019 

Health Service Provider: Sandy Hill Community Health Centre 


OHRS Description & Functionai Centre 

These values are provided for information purposes only. They are not Accountability Indicators. 


2018-2019 


^ , Performance 

Standard 

Administration and Support Services 72 1* 

Full-time equivalents (FTE) 

72 1* 


18.10 


n/a 


Total Cost for Functional Centre 

72 1* 

$2,026,895 

n/a 

Clinical Management 72 5 05 

Full-time equivalents (FTE) 

72 5 05 


0.50 


n/a 


Total Cost for Functional Centre 

72 5 05 

$62,448 

n/a 

Case Management Addictions - Substance Abuse 72 5 09 78 11 

Full-time equivalents (FTE) 

72 5 09 7811 


6.92 


n/a 


Visits 

72 5 09 7811 

3,025 

2723-3328 

Not Uniquely Identified Service Recipient Interactions 

72 5 09 7811 

50 

40-60 

Individuals Served by Functional Centre 

72 5 09 7811 

540 

459 - 621 

Group Sessions 

72 5 09 7811 

24 

19-29 

Total Cost for Functional Centre 

72 5 09 7811 

$790,782 

n/a 

Group Participant Attendances 

72 5 09 7811 

144 

115-173 

Clinics/Programs - General Clinic 72 5 10 20 

Full-time equivalents (FTE) 

72 5 10 20 


27.34 


n/a 


Not Uniquely Identified Service Recipient Interactions 

72 5 10 20 

20 

16-24 

Individuals Served by Functional Centre 

72 5 10 20 

3,776 

3398-4154 

Total Cost for Functional Centre 

72 5 10 20 

$3,460,206 

n/a 

Service Provider Interactions 

72 5 10 20 

22,600 

21470-23730 

Clinics/Programs - Therapy Clinic - Foot Care 72 5 10 40 20 

Full-time equivalents (FTE) 

72 5 10 40 20 


5.70 


n/a 


Individuals Served by Functional Centre 

72 5 10 40 20 

3,500 

3150-3850 

Total Cost for Functional Centre 

72 5 10 40 20 

$520,265 

n/a 

Service Provider Interactions 

72 5 10 40 20 

7,500 

7125-7875 

Clinics/Programs - Chronic Disease Clinic - General Clinic 72 5 10 50 10 

Full-time equivalents (FTE) 

72 5 10 50 10 


3.80 


n/a 


Individuals Served by Functional Centre 

72 5 10 50 10 

300 

240 - 360 

Group Sessions 

72 5 10 50 10 

200 

160 - 240 

Total Cost for Functional Centre 

72 5 10 50 10 

$537,272 

n/a 

Group Participant Attendances 

72 5 10 50 10 

1,900 

1710-2090 

Service Provider Interactions 

72 5 10 50 10 

500 

425 - 575 

Service Provider Group Interactions 

72 5 10 50 10 

500 

425-575 

Clinics/Programs - Chronic Disease Clinic - Hepatitis C and/or HIV/AIDS Clinic 72 5 10 50 40 

Full-time equivalents (FTE) 

72 5 10 50 40 


8.40 


n/a 


Not Uniquely Identified Service Recipient Interactions 

72 5 10 50 40 

100 

80 -120 

Individuals Served by Functional Centre 

72 5 10 50 40 

1,200 

1080 - 1320 

Group Sessions 

72 5 10 50 40 

150 

120 -180 

Total Cost for Functional Centre 

72 5 10 50 40 

$1,043,581 

n/a 

Group Participant Attendances 

72 5 10 50 40 

650 

553 - 748 

Service Provider Interactions 

72 5 10 50 40 

3,500 

3150-3850 






















































































































































Schedule E2a: Clinical Activity- Detail 

2018-2019 

Health Service Provider: Sandy Hill Community Health Centre 


OHRS Description & Functionai Centre 

These values are provided for information purposes only. They are not Accountability Indicators. 


2018-2019 


^ Performance 

Standard 

Service Provider Group interactions 

72 5 10 50 40 


150 


120-180 


Addictions Treatment-Substance Abuse 72 5 10 78 11 

Full-time equivalents (FTE) 

72 5 10 7811 


5.44 


n/a 


Visits 

72 5 10 7811 

2,900 

2610-3190 

Not Uniqueiy identified Service Recipient interactions 

72 5 10 7811 

1,100 

990-1210 

individuais Served by Functionai Centre 

72 5 10 7811 

800 

680 - 920 

Group Sessions 

72 5 10 7811 

200 

160 - 240 

Total Cost for Functional Centre 

72 5 10 7811 

$565,487 

n/a 

Group Participant Attendances 

72 5 10 7811 

1,800 

1620 - 1980 

Service Provider interactions 

72 5 10 7811 

2,900 

2610-3190 

Service Provider Group Interactions 

72 5 10 7811 

250 

200 - 300 

Addictions Treatment-Problem Gambling 72 5 10 78 12 

Full-time equivalents (FTE) 

72 5 10 7812 


2.80 


n/a 


Visits 

72 5 10 7812 

1,900 

1710-2090 

Individuals Served by Functional Centre 

72 5 10 7812 

320 

256-384 

Group Sessions 

72 5 10 7812 

60 

48-72 

Total Cost for Functional Centre 

72 5 10 7812 

$291,285 

n/a 

Group Participant Attendances 

72 5 10 7812 

600 

510-690 

Service Provider Interactions 

72 5 10 7812 

1,900 

1710-2090 

Service Provider Group Interactions 

72 5 10 7812 

120 

96 -144 

Health Prom/Educ. & Com.Dev. - Community Engagement and Capacity Building 72 5 50 14 

Full-time equivalents (FTE) 

72 5 50 14 


2.21 


n/a 


Total Cost for Functional Centre 

72 5 50 14 

$126,822 

n/a 

CHC Client Support Services 72 5 85 

Full-time equivalents (FTE) 

72 5 85 


5.31 


n/a 


Not Uniquely Identified Service Recipient Interactions 

72 5 85 

80 

64-96 

Individuals Served by Functional Centre 

72 5 85 

700 

595-805 

Total Cost for Functional Centre 

72 5 85 

$353,506 

n/a 

Service Provider Interactions 

72 5 85 

1,200 

1080 - 1320 

ACTIVITY SUMMARY 

Total Full-Time Equivalents for all F/C 


86.52 


n/a 


Total Visits for all F/C 

7,825 

7434-8216 

Total Not Uniquely Identified Service Recipient Interactions for aii F/C 

1,350 

1215-1485 

Total Individuals Served by Functional Centre for all F/C 

11,136 

10579 - 11693 

Total Group Sessions for all F/C 

634 

539-729 

Total Group Participants for all F/C 

5,094 

4839 - 5349 

Total Service Provider Interactions for all F/C 

40,100 

38897-41303 

Total Service Provider Group Interactions for all F/C 

1,020 

918-1122 

Total Cost for All F/C 

9,778,549 

n/a 




















































































































































Schedule E2b: CHC Sector Specific Indicators 

2018-2019 


Health Service Provider: Sandy Hill Commur 


Performance Indicators 

Cervical Cancer Screening Rate (PAP tests) 

Colorectal Screening Rate 
Inter-professional Diabetes Care Rate 
Influenza Vaccination Rate 
Breast Cancer Screening Rate 
Retention Rate (For NPs and Physicians) 

Access to Primary Care 

Client Satisfaction-Access 

Clinic support staff per primary care provider 

Number of Registered Clients 


Non-Insured Clients 


2018-2019 

Performance 

Target 

Standard 











































Schedule E2c: CMH&A Sector Specific Indicators 

2018-2019 

Health Service Provider: Sandy Hill Community Health Centre 



Explanatory Indicators 

Repeat Unplanned Emergency Visits within 30 days for Mental Health conditions 


Repeat Unplanned Emergency Visits within 30 days for Substance Abuse conditions 


Average Number of Days Waited from Referral/Application to Initial Assessment Complete 


Average number of days waited from Initial Assessment Complete to Service Initiation 


















Schedule E3a Local: All 
2018-2019 


Health Service Provider: Sandy Hill Community Health Centre 


Indigenous Cultural Awareness : The Health Service Provider will report on the activities it has undertaken during the fiscal year to increase the indigenous cultural awareness and 
sensitivity of its staff, physicians and volunteers throughout the organization. This supports the goal of improving access to health services and health outcomes for indigenous 
people. The Indigenous Cultural Awareness Report, using a template to be provided by the LHIN, is due to the LHIN by April 30, 2019 and should be submitted using the subject line: 
2018-19 Indigenous Cultural Awareness Report to ch.accountabilityteam@lhins.on.ca . HSPs that have multiple accountability agreements with the LHIN should provide one 
aggregated report for the corporation. 


Executive Succession : The Health Service Provider must inform the LHIN prior to undertaking a recruitment process or appointment for a CEO or Executive Director. 


Health Links Partners: The Health Service Provider, in collaboration with the Health Link Lead and other partners, will contribute to the scaling and sustainability of Health Links care 
coordination with patients/clients with complex needs, including the identification of clients, participation on patient care teams and as appropriate, delivery of coordinated care to 
achieve the 2018-19 target number of coordinated care plans. 

The HSP will ensure awareness within its organization of the Health Links approach, the desired patient and system outcomes and its contribution to advancing this critical work. 

The HSP is aware that the specific system-metrics that are being monitored and reported include: 

The percentage of 30 day readmissions to hospitals within the sub-region; 

The percentage of acute care patients who have had a follow-up with a physician within 7 days of discharge within the sub-region; and 
The number of avoidable ED visits for identified complex patients with conditions best managed elsewhere within the sub-region. 


In 2018-19, the HSP will work in collaboration with the LHIN, the Health Links Leads and primary care organizations (as appropriate) to support reporting for the following 
information: 

Patient experience metrics; 

The number and percentage of complex patients with regular and timely access to a primary care provider. 

The average time patients waited from referral (for CCP) to initial assessment; and 

The number of sectors and organizations involved in identifying and referring individuals who might benefit from a coordinated care plan. 

For Specific-HSPs providing care coordination: 


The HSP will meet its 2018-19 commitments for: 

Care coordination capacity as agreed to with the sub-regional Health Link Lead organization Capacity Plan and 

Completed Coordinated Care Plans (CCPs) by March 31, 2019. The number of completed Coordinated Care Plan committed will be outlined in an amendment to this agreement 
in Q1 2018-19, if applicable. 


The HSP will provide requested information to the respective Health Link Lead to support timely and accurate reporting. 


Sub-region Planning : The Champlain LHIN has established five sub-regions in order to improve patient and client health outcomes through population health planning and integrated 
service delivery. HSPS are expected to collaborate in the development of sub-region planning, and to contribute to more coordinated care for sub-regional populations across the 
continuum of primary, home, community, and long-term care and to improve transitions from hospital to community care. This will require close collaboration and partnership with 
primary care providers in each sub-region in meeting the needs of their patients. 
















Schedule E3b Local: CHC Local Indicators 
2018-2019 

Health Service Provider: Sandy Hill Community Health Centre 


Ottawa Model of Smoking Cessation: Community Health Centres participating in the Ottawa Model of Smoking Cessation will collect baseline and post-implementation performance 
metrics and submit these to the University of Ottawa Heart Institute (UOHI) according to individual agreements between the CHC and the UOHI. 


Sub-acute Care Plan Implementation: The Health Service Provider will maintain an awareness of the Champlain LHIN Sub-acute Care Plan and participate in implementation as 
requested by the LHIN. The HSP’s sub-acute care volume, performance, and associated funding will be adjusted in accordance with, and subject to the approval, of the regional sub¬ 
acute care implementation plan. 






Schedule E3c Local: CMH&A Local Indicators 
2018-2019 


Health Service Provider: Sandy Hill Community Health Centre 



Client Evaluation - Mental Health and Addictions : The HSP will use the Ontario Perception of Care tool (OPOC) as the standard evaluation tool for all registered and non-registered 
clients, including family members. The HSP will upload their OPOCs to the OPOC data base. HSPs will provide an annual report to the LHIN (within 60 days of fiscal year end) on 
their OPOC results by program, and their proposed quality improvement initiatives to respond to OPOC results. HSPs preferring to use other sector-specific, client perception of care 
tools must submit their request to the LHIN for approval. 


Screening and assessment tools - Mental Health and Addictions : To help build a more integrated system, Community Mental Health and Addictions Health Service Providers 
(HSPs) will use the GAIN suite of Staged Screening and Assessment Tools as mandated by the Ministry of Health and Long-Term Care and the LHIN, as follows: 

Stage 1 Screener: Global Appraisal of Individual Need (GAIN) Short Screener (SS) (Addictions, Concurrent Disorders, Mental Health) 

Stage 2 Screener for 18+: Modified Mini Screener (MMS) (Addictions, Concurrent Disorders, Mental Health (Optional)) 

Stage 2 Screener for under 17: Problem Oriented Screening Instrument for Teenagers (POSIT) (Addictions, Concurrent Disorders, Mental Health (Optional)) 

Stage 1 Assessment: GAIN Q3 MI ONT (with substance use grids from GAIN-I) (Addictions, Concurrent Disorders, Mental Health (Optional)) 

The HSP will work with the LHIN and CAMH to train (and certify, where appropriate) staff in the use of these tools, record/upload relevant data into Catalyst (or CLHIN SharePoint 
site for MH providers) in a timely manner, monitor program use, and review organizational results quarterly 

The HSP will submit a Catalyst report to the LHIN within 30 days of the end of the 2 "^ and 4**^ quarters of each year summarizing their use of the GAIN-SS and GAIN Q3 ONT MI 
tools. 

The HSP will collaborate with the Champlain SSA Implementation Steering Committee and the Ottawa Addictions Access and Referral Service (OAARS) to develop an 
organizational implementation and sustainability action plan. 


Mental Health Assessment : To help build a more integrated system, mental health and concurrent disorder service providers will use the Ontario Common Assessment of Need 
(OCAN) tool with all present and future clients, and submit this data in the corresponding database. 


Workforce Development and Capacity Building : Mental Health and Addictions : All Community Mental Health and Addictions Health Service Providers (HSPs) will integrate the 
Champlain Mental Health and Addictions Competency model and related tools for purposes of recruitment, professional development, and performance management. HSPs will use the 
Competency Core software tool for these purposes. HSPs preferring to use alternative sector-specific, evidence-based Competency models and tools must submit their request to the 
LHIN for approval. 


Repeat Unscheduled Emergency Visits within 30 days for Mental Health Conditions : The Health Service Provider will achieve a target of 16.3% 


Repeat Unscheduled Emergency Visits within 30 days for Substance Abuse Conditions : The Health Service Provider will achieve a target of 22.4% 









Schedule F: Project Funding 
2018-2019 

Health Service Provider: Sandy Hill Community Health Centre 


Project Funding Agreement Template 

Note: This project template is intended to be used to fund one-off projects or for the provision of services not ordinarily provided by the HSP. 
Whether or not the HSP provides the services directly or subcontracts the provision of the services to another provider, the HSP remains 
accountable for the funding that is provided by the LHIN. 

THIS PROJECT FUNDING AGREEMENT (“PFA”) is effective as of [insert date] (the “Effective Date”) between: 


XXX LOCAL HEALTH INTEGRATION NETWORK (the “LHIN”) 
- and - 

[Legal Name of the Health Service Provider] (the “HSP”) 


WHEREAS the LHIN and the HSP entered into a service accountability agreement dated [insert date] (the “SAA”) for the provision of Services and now wish to 
set out the terms of pursuant to which the LHIN will fund the HSP for [insert brief description of project] (the “Project”); 

NOW THEREFORE in consideration of their respective agreements set out below and subject to the terms of the SAA, the parties covenant and agree as 
follows: 

1.0 Definitions. Unless otherwise specified in this PFA, capitalized words and phrases shall have the meaning set out in the SAA. When used 

in this PFA, the following words and phrases have the following meanings: 


“Project Funding” means the funding for the Services; 

“Services ” mean the services described in Appendix A to this PFA; and 

“Term” means the period of time from the Effective Date up to and including [insert project end date]. 

2.0 Relationship between the SAA and this PFA. This PFA is made subject to and hereby incorporates the terms of the SAA. On execution 

this PFA will be appended to the SAA as a Schedule. 

3.0 The Services. The HSP agrees to provide the Services on the terms and conditions of this PFA including all of its Appendices and 

schedules. 

4.0 Rates and Payment Process. Subject to the SAA, the Project Funding for the provision of the Services shall be as specified in Appendix 

A to this PFA. 












Schedule F: Project Funding 
2018-2019 

Health Service Provider: Sandy Hill Community Health Centre 


















Schedule F: Project Funding 
2018-2019 

Health Service Provider: Sandy Hill Community Health Centre 














Schedule G: Declaration of Compliance 
2018-2019 

Health Service Provider: Sandy Hill Community Health Centre 

















