NON-DISCLOSURE AGREEMENT 



This Non-Disclosure Agreement (this "Agreement") is made and entered into as of 
this 2^ day of DrJ^L<y . 20)2, by and between The Big Ten Conference, Inc., on 
behalf of itself and its affiliates (collectively, the "Conference"), and The University of 
Maryland, on behalf of itself and its affiliates (collectively "Maryland"). 

Statement of Purpose 

The parties are contemplating a possible negotiated transaction with each other (the 
"Transaction"), and in order to determineJhe-viability of the Transaction, the Conference will 
need to disclose to Maryland certain information relating to the Conference's business, finances, 
member institutions and operations, and Maryland will need to disclose to the Conference certain 
information relating to Maryland's business, finances and operations on the terms and conditions 
set forth in this Agreement. For purposes of this Agreement, the party receiving such 
information shall be referred to as the "Receiving Party" and the party disclosing such 
information shall be referred to as the "Disclosing Party." 

Now, Therefore, injconsideration of the premises and the mutual covenants set forth 
herein, the Conference and Maryland hereby agree as follows: 

1. Definition of Confidential Information . All information owned by or about the 
Disclosing Party furnished to the Receiving Party or its shareholders, members, directors, 
trustees, officers, employees, agents, affiliates, financing sources, attorneys, accountants and 
other advisors or representatives (collectively, "Representative!"), whether furnished before or 
after the date hereof, and regardless of the manner in which such information is furnished, is 
referred to herein as "Confidential Information." The term "Confidential Information" also 
shall be deemed to include all notes, analyses, compilations, studies, interpretations, oral 
discussions or other documents prepared by the Receiving Party or its Representatives that 
contain, reflect or are based upon, in whole or in part, Confidential Information. Confidential 
Information does not include, however, information which (a) is or becomes generally available 
to the public other than as a result of an impermissible disclosure by the Receiving Party or its 
Representatives, (b) was known by or available on a non-confidential basis to the Receiving 
Party prior to its disclosure by the Disclosing Party or its Representatives, or (c) becomes 
available to the Receiving Party on a non-confidential basis from a person other than the 
Disclosing Party who is not bound by a confidentiality agreement with or other obligation of 
secrecy to the Disclosing Party. As used herein, the term "person" shall be broadly interpreted to 
include without limitation any corporation, limited liability-company, partnership, -other entity or 
individual. 

2. Use of Confidential Information . The Receiving Party hereby agrees (a) except as 
required by law, (i) to keep all Confidential Information confidential and not to disclose or reveal 
any Confidential Information to any person other than its Representatives who need to know the 
Confidential Information for the purpose of assisting the Receiving Party in evaluating the 
Transaction and (ii) to instruct such Representatives to observe the terms of this Agreement, and 
(b) not to use Confidential Information for any purpose other than in connection with the 
evaluation of the Transaction. The Receiving Party hereby agrees to be responsible for any 

1 

703503952.1 



disclosures or other acts or omissions by it or any of its Representatives that would be a violation 
of this Agreement if such Representative were a party to this Agreement. In the event that the 
Receiving Party or any of its Representatives is required, pursuant to applicable law, to disclose 
any Confidential Information, the Receiving Party shall provide the Disclosing Party with 
prompt notice of any such requests to enable the Disclosing Party to seek an appropriate 
protective order and the Receiving Party shall reasonably-eocperate with the Disclosing Party* at 
the Disclosing Party's expense, in seeking such protective order or other assurance. If such 
protective order or other remedy is not obtained, the Receiving Party shall furnish only that 
portion of the Confidential Information which, in the opinion of its counsel, it is required to 
disclose and the Receiving Party shall use best efforts to obtain assurances that confidential 
treatment will be accorded to that portion of the Confidential Information-disclosed. 

3. Nondisclosure of Discussions , Unless otherwise required by law and except as expressly 
permitted by this Agreement, neither the Conference nor Maryland shall, and each shall instruct 
their respective Representatives not to, disclose to any person (a) that the Conference or 
Maryland are or_may be contemplating the Transaction with each other or any other person or 
(b) any of the terms, conditions or other facts with respect thereto. 

4. Return of Confidential Information . If the Receiving Party determines that it does not 
wish to proceed with the Transaction, it shall promptly advise the Disclosing Party of that 
decision. In that case or at any lime that the Disclosing Party requests, the Receiving Party shall 
promptly deliver to the Disclosing Party all of the Confidential Information, including all copies, 
reproductions, summaries, analyses or extracts thereof or based thereon, in its possession or in 
the possession of any of its Representatives. All notes, memoranda or other writings prepared by 
the Receiving Party or its Representatives reflecting or involving the Confidential Information in 
any way which are not so delivered to the Disclosing Party upon the Disclosing Party's request 
shall in such case be destroyed and, at the Disclosing Party's request, such destruction shall be 
certified in writing to the Disclosing Party by an authorized officer supervising such destruction. 
NotwithstandingJhe return or destruction of any Confidential Information, the P^eceiving Party 
will continue to be bound by its obligations of confidentiality and other obligations hereunder. 

5. No Representation or Warranty . The Receiving Party .understands that neither the 
Disclosing Party nor its Representatives have made or make any representation or warranty as to 
the accuracy or completeness of the Confidential Information. The Receiving Party agrees that 
neither the Disclosing Party nor its Representatives shall have-any liability to the Receiving Party 
or its Representatives resulting from the use of the Confidential Information by the Receiving 
Party or its Representatives. 

6. Remedies . Without prejudice to the rights and remedies otherwise available to the 
Disclosing Party, since monetary damages may not be sufficient to remedy a violation of this 
Agreement, the Receiving Party agrees that the Disclosing Party shall be entitled to seek 
equitable relief, including injunctive relief, if the Receiving Party or any of its Representatives 
breaches or threatens to breach any of" the provisions of this Agreement. 

7. Binding Effect . This Agreement does not create any binding legal or contractual 
obligations on the part of either the Conference or Maryland with respect to any negotiations 
concerning the Transaction. Unless and until a definitive agreement between the Conference and 



703503952.1 



Maryland with respect to the Transaction has been executed and delivered, neither the 
Conference nor Maryland will be under any legal obligation of any kind whatsoever by virtue of 
this Agreement or any other written or oral expression with respect to the Transaction by any 
Representatives of the Conference or of Maryland except, in the case of this Agreement, for the 
matters specifically agreed to herein. For purposes of this Agreement, the-term "definitive 
agreement" does not include an executed letter of intent or other preliminary written agreement, 
nor does it include any written or verbal acceptance of an offer or bid, unless the terms thereof so 
expressly provide-and make reference to this Agreement. Notwithstanding the foregoing, this 
Agreement is intended to create binding legal obligations of the parties hereto with respect to the 
Confidential Information and the other provisions contained in this Agreement. 

8. Costs of Legal Action . The Conference and-Maryiand each agree that if it is held by any 
court of competent jurisdiction Lu be in violation, breach or nonperformance of any of the terms 
of this Agreement, then it will pay all costs incurred by the other party or any of its 
Representatives in connection with such action or suit, including reasonable attorneys* fees. 

9. Termination . This Agreement and-the obligations of the parties hereto shalj terminate 
and be of no further force and effect on the tenth anniversary of the date of this Agreement. 

[signatures appear on tfnrfcrilowing page] 



7035O39M.1 



In Witness Whereof, the parties have caused their duly authorized representatives to 
execute this Non-Disclosure Agreement all as of the day and year first above written. 



The Conference: 



Maryland: 



The Bic Ten Conference, Inc. 




703503952.1 



