Central 


Anrxexad For Release 2006/01/03 : CIA-RDP87B01034R000500140005-1 
Intelligence 


Director of Central Intelligence 
Directive No. 1/14 


by the 
Security Committee 


SECOM-D-147 
Approved For Release 2006/01/03 : CIA-RDP87B01034R000800140605-1 


Approved For Release 2006/01/03 : CIA-RDP87B01034R000500140005-1 


DCID No. 1/14 
13 May 1976 


DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE DIRECTIVE NO. 1/14! : 


MINIMUM PERSONNEL SECURITY STANDARDS AND PROCEDURES 7 
GOVERNING ELIGIBILITY. FOR ACCESS TO SENSITIVE . 2 
COMPARTMENTED INFORMATION . 


(Effective 13 May 1976) 


Pursuant to the provisions of Executive Order 11905, Section 102 of the National 
Security Act of 1947 and National Security Council Directives, the following 
minimum personnel security standards, procedures and continuing security programs 
are hereby established for all United States Government civilian and military 
personnel, consultants, contractors, employees of contractors and other individuals : 
who require access to Sensitive Compartmented Information ? (hereinafter referred to 
as SCI). The standards, procedures and programs established herein are minimum and 
the departments and agencies may establish such additional security steps as may be 


deemed necessary and appropriate to ensure that effective security is maintained. ae 


Purpose 


1. The purpose of this Directive is to enhance the security protection of SCI 
through the application of minimum security standards, procedures and continuing 
security programs, and to facilitate the security certification process among Govern- : 
ment departments and agencies. E 


Applicability 


2. The provisions of the Directive shall apply to all persons (other than elected 
officials of the United States Government, federal judges and those individuals for 
whom the DCI makes a specific exception) without regard to civilian or military 
status, form of employment, official rank or position or length of service. 


2 IMR ESTTTT | 


3. Individuals who do not meet the minimum security criteria contained herein 
and who are, therefore, denied access to SCI shall not, solely, for this reason, be 
considered ineligible for access to other classified information. Individuals whose 
access to SCI has been authorized as an exception granted in accordance with 
paragraph 7 below, shall not, solely for that reason, be considered eligible for access to 
other classified information. 2 


bell IE 


' This directive supersedes DCID 1/14 approved 1 July 1968. 

* The term “Sensitive Compartmented Information” as used in this Directive is intended to include all 
information and materials bearing special community controls indicating restricted handling within present 
and future community intelligence collection programs and their end products for which community 
systems of compartmentation have been or will be formally established. The term does not include a 
Restricted Data as defined in Section II, Public Laws 585, Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended. 7 


Approved For Release 2006/01/03 : CIA-RDP87B01034R000500140005-1 


Approved For Release 2006/01/03 : CIA-RDP87B01034R000500140005-1 


General 


4. The granting of access to SCI shall be controlled under the strictest application 
of the “need-to-know”’ principle under procedures prescribed in the several existing 
authorities which govern access thereto, and in accordance with the personnel security 
standards and procedures set forth in this Directive. All persons accountable under the 
authority of this Directive and given access to information (SCI) containing sources or 
methods of intelligence shall, as a condition of obtaining access, sign an agreement that 
they will not disclose that information to persons not authorized to receive it. 


Personnel Security Standards 


5. Criteria for security approval of an individual on a need-to-know basis for 
access to SCI are as follows: 


a. The individual shall be stable, of excellent character and discretion and of 
unquestioned loyalty to the United States. 


b. Except where there is a compelling need, and a determination has been 
made by competent authority as described in paragraph 7 below that every 
reasonable assurance has been obtained that under the circumstances the security 
risk is negligible: 


(1) Both the individual and the members of his or her immediate family 
shall be US citizens. For these purposes “immediate family” is defined as 
including the individual’s spouse, parents, brothers, sisters and children. 


(2) The members of the individual’s immediate family and persons to whom 
he is bound by affection or obligation should neither be subject to physical, 
mental or other forms of duress by a foreign power, nor advocate the use of 
force or violence to overthrow the Government of the United States or the 
alteration of the form of Government of the United States by unconstitutional 
means. 


6. In excepticnal cases, the Senior Intelligence Officer (SIO) of the Intelligence 
Community organization, or his designee, may determine that it is necessary or 
advisable in the National interest to authorize access to SCI prior to completion of the 
fully prescribed investigation. In this situation such investigative checks as are 
immediately possible shall be made at once, and should include a personal interview 
by trained security or counterintelligence personnel. Access in such cases shall be 
strictly controlled, and the fully prescribed investigation and final evaluation shall be 
completed at the earliest practicable moment. 


Exceptions 


7. The exceptions to paragraph 5.b.(1)(2) above may be granted only by the SIO 
or his designee, unless such authority has been specifically delegated to the head of an 
office or organization as set forth in inter-departmental agreements. All exceptions 
granted will be common sense determinations based on all available information, and 
shall be recorded by the agency making the exception. In those cases in which the 
individual has lived outside of the United States for a substantial period of his life, a 
thorough assessment of the adequacy of the investigation in terms of fulfillment of the 


2 
Approved For Release 2006/01/03 : CIA-RDP87B01034R000500140005-1 


Approved For Release 2006/01/03 : CIA-RDP87B01034R000500140005-1 


minimum investigative requirements, and judicious review of the information therein 
must be made before an exception is considered. 


Investigative Requirements 


8. The investigation conducted on an individual under consideration for access to 
SCI will be thorough and shall be designed to develop information as to whether the 
individual clearly meets the above Personnel Security Standards. 


9. The investigation shall be accomplished through record checks and personal 
interviews of various sources by trained investigative personnel in order to establish 
affirmatively to the adjudicating agency complete continuity of identity to include 
birth, residences, education, employments and military service. Where the 
circumstances of a case indicate, the investigation shall exceed the basic requirements 
set out below to ensure that those responsible for adjudicating access eligibility have in 
their possession all the relevant facts available. 


10. The individual shall furnish a signed personal history statement, fingerprints 
of a quality acceptable to the Federal Bureau of Investigation and a signed release, as 
necessary, authorizing custodians of police, credit, education and medical records, to 
provide record information to the investigative agency. Photographs of the individual 
shall also be obtained where additional corroboration of identity is required, 


11. Minimum standards for the investigation are as follows, 
a. Verification of date and place of birth and citizenship. 


b. Check of the subversive and criminal files of the Federal Bureau of 
Investigation, including submission of fingerprint charts, and such other National 
agencies as are appropriate to the individual’s background. An additional check 
of Immigration and Naturalization Service records shall be conducted on those 
members of the individual’s immediate family who are United States citizens 
other than by birth or who are resident aliens. 


c. A check of appropriate police records covering all areas where the 
individual has resided in the US throughout the most recent fifteen (15) years or 
since age eighteen, whichever is the shorter period. 


d. Verification of the individual’s financial status and credit habits through 
checks of appropriate credit institutions and interviews with knowledgeable 
sources covering the most recent five (5) years. 


e. Interviews with neighbors in the vicinity of all the individual's residences in 
excess of six (6) months throughout the most recent five (5) year period. This 
coverage shall be expanded where the investigation suggests the existence of some 
questionable behavioral pattern. 


f. Confirmation of all employment during the past fifteen (15) years or since 
age eighteen, whichever is the shorter period but in any event the most recent 
two years. Personal interviews with supervisors and co-workers at places of 
employment covering the past ten (10) years shall be accomplished. 


8 


Approved For Release 2006/01/03 : CIA-RDP87B01034R000500140005-1 


fei bly 


Approved For Release 2006/01/03 : CIA-RDP87B01034R000500140005-1 


g. Verification of attendance at institutes of higher learning in all instances and 
at the last secondary school attended within the past fifteen (15) years. 
Attendance at secondary schools may be verified through qualified collateral 
sources. If attendance at educational institutions occurred within the most recent 
five (5) years, personal interviews with faculty members or other persons who 
were acquainted with the individual during his attendance shall be accomplished. 


h. Review of appropriate military records. 


i. Interviews with a sufficient number of knowledgeable acquaintances (a 
minimum of three developed during the course of the investigation) as necessary 
to provide a continuity to the extent practicable, of the individual’s activities and 
behavioral patterns over the past fifteen years with particular emphasis on the 
most recent five years. 


j. When employment, education or residence, has occurred overseas (except 
for periods of less than five (5) years for personnel on US Government assignment 
and less than ninety days for other purposes) during the past fifteen years or since 
age eighteen, a check of the records will be made at the Department of State and 
other appropriate agencies. Efforts shall be made to develop sources, generally in 
the United States, who knew the individual overseas in order to cover significant 
employment, education or residence and to attempt to determine if any lasting 
foreign contacts or connections were established during this period. However, in 
all cases where an individual. has worked or lived outside of the US continuously 
for over five years, the investigation will be expanded to cover fully this period in 
his life through the use of such investigative assets and checks of record sources as 
may be available to the US Government in the foreign country(ies) in which the 
individual resided. 


k. In those instances in which the individual has immediate family members or 
other persons with whom he is bonded by affection or obligation in any of the 
situations described in subparagraph 5.b.(2), above, the investigation will include 
an interview of the individual by trained security, investigative or counter- 
intelligence personnel to ascertain the facts as they may relate to the individual’s 
access eligibility. 


1. In all cases the individual’s spouse shall at a minimum be checked through 
the subversive files of the Federal Bureau of Investigation and other National 
agencies as appropriate. When conditions indicate, additional investigation shall 
be conducted on the spouse of the individual and members of the immediate 
family to the extent necessary to permit a determination by the adjudicating 
agency that the provisions of paragraph 5, Personnel Security Standards, above, 
are met. 


m. A personal interview of the individual will be conducted by trained 
security, investigative or counterintelligence personnel when necessary to resolve 
any significant adverse information and/or inconsistencies developed during the 
investigation. 


12. Where a previous investigation has been conducted within the past five years 


which substantially meets the above minimum standards, it may serve as a basis for 


4 


Approved For Release 2006/01/03 : CIA-RDP87B01034R000500140005-1 


Approved For Release 2006/01/03 : CIA-RDP87B01034R000500140005-1 


granting access approval provided a review of the personnel and security files does not 
reveal substantive changes in the individual’s security eligibility. If a previous 
investigation does not substantially meet the minimum standards or if it is more than 
five years old, a current investigation shall be required but may be limited to that 
necessary to bring the individual’s file up-to-date in accordance with the investigative 
requirements set forth in paragraph 11 above. Should new information be developed 
during the current investigation which bears unfavorably upon the individual’s 
activities covered by the previous investigation, the current inquiries shall be 
expanded as necessary to develop full details of this new information. 


13. Prograrns shall be instituted requiring the periodic reinvestigation of 
personnel provided access to SCI. These reinvestigations will be conducted on a five 
year recurrent basis, but on a more frequent basis where the individual has shown 
some questionable behavioral pattern, his activities are otherwise suspect, or when 
deemed necessary by the SIO concerned.’ 


14. The scope of reinvestigations shall be determined by the SIO concerned 
based on such considerations as the potential damage that might result from the 
individual’s defection or willful compromise of SCI and the availability and probable 
effectiveness of other means to continually evaluate factors related to the individual’s 
suitability for continued access. In all cases, the reinvestigation shall include, as a 
minimum, appropriate National agency checks, local agency (including overseas 
checks where appropriate), credit checks and a personal discussion with the individual 
by trained investigative, security or counterintelligence personnel when necessary to 
resolve significant adverse information or inconsistencies. 


15. The evaluation of the information developed by investigation on an 
individual's loyalty and suitability shall be accomplished under the cognizance of the 
SIO concerned by analysts of broad knowledge, good judgment and wide experience 
in personnel security and/or counterintelligence. When all other information 
developed on an individual is favorable, a minor investigative requirement which has 
not been met should not preclude favorable adjudication. In all evaluations the 
protection of the national interest is paramount. Any doubt concerning personnel 
having access to SCI shall be resolved in favor of the national security. The ultimate 
determination of whether the granting of access is clearly consistent with the interest 
of national security shall be an overall common sense determination based on all 
available information. 


Continuing Security Programs 


16. In order to facilitate the attainment of the highest standard of personnel 
security and to augment both the access approval criteria and the investigate 
requirements established by this Directive, member departments and agencies shall 
institute continuing security programs for all individuals having access to SCL In 
addition to security indoctrinations, these programs shall be tailored to create mutually 
supporting procedures under which no issue will escape notice or be left unresolved 
which brings into question an individual’s loyalty and integrity or suggests the 
possibility of his being subject to undue influence or duress through foreign 


‘In DoD, an SIO may request, with the approval of the Secretary of Defense or his designee, more 
frequent reinvestigations under special circumstances. 


Approved For Release 2006/01/03 : CIA-RDP87B01034R000500140005-1 


1 ot 


Approved For Release 2006/01/03 : CIA-RDP87B01034R000500140005-1 


relationships or exploitable personal conduct. When an individual is assigned to 
perform sensitive compartmented work requiring access to SCI, the SIO for the 
department, agency or Government program to which the individual is assigned shall 
assume security supervision of that individual throughout the period of his assignment. 


17. The continuing security programs shall include the followings: 


a. Security education programs to ensure that individuals who are granted 
access to SCI are initially indoctrinated and periodically thereafter instructed as 
to its unique sensitivity and that they understand their personal responsibility for 
maintaining eligibility for continued access to SCI rests with the individual. 
Therefore, the individual is encouraged to seek appropriate guidance and 
assistance on any personal problem or situation which may have a possible 
bearing on his eligibility for continued access to SCI, and security counseling 
should be made available. These instructions should be conducted by individuals 
having extensive background and experience regarding the nature and special 
vulnerabilities of the particular type of compartmented information involved. 


b. Security supervisory programs to ensure that supervisory personnel recog- 
nize and discharge their special responsibility in matters pertaining to the security 
of SCI, including the eligibility for SCI access. Such programs shall provide 
practical guidance as to indicators which may signal matters of security concern. 
Specific instructions concerning reporting procedures shall be disseminated to 
enable the appropriate authority to take timely corrective action to safeguard the 
security of the United States as well as to provide all necessary help to the 
individual concerned to neutralize his vulnerability. 


c. Security Review Programs to ensure that appropriate security authorities 
invariably receive and exchange, in a timely manner, all information bearing on 
the security posture of persons having access to sensitive information. Personnel 
history information shall be kept current. Security and related files shall be kept 
under continuing review. 


18. Whenever adverse or derogatory information is discovered or inconsistencies 
arise which could impact upon an individual’s security status, appropriate investiga- 
tions shall be conducted on a timely basis. The investigation shall be of sufficient scope 
necessary to resolve the specific adverse or derogatory information, or inconsistency, 
in question so that a determination can be made as to whether the individual's 
continued utilization in activities requiring SCI is clearly consistent with the interests 
of the national security. 


6 


Approved For Release 2006/01/03 : CIA-RDP87B01034R000500140005-1 


eae ER Ah ie tp the blondie 


WERTEAL 


Approved For Release 2006/01/03 : CIA-RDP87B01034R000500140005-1 


Effective Date 


19. This Directive supersedes DCID 1/14, 1 July 1968. Existing directives,‘ 
regulations, agreements and such other references governing access to SCI as defined 
herein shall be revised accordingly. 


* These include pertinent provisions of the Clearance Standards and Investigation and Evaluation section 
of the Communications Intelligence Security Regulations. 


GEORGE BUSH 


Director of Central Intelligence 


7 


Approved For Release 2006/01/03 : CIA-RDP87B01034R000500140005-1 


ee 


BEd A papa es 


Approved For Release 2006/01/03 : CIA-RDP87B01034R000500140005-1 


19 March 1980 


ANNEX A 
DCID 1/14 ADJUDICATION GUIDELINES 


PURPOSE 


This annex is designed to ensure that a common approach is followed by 
Intelligence Community Departments and Agencies in applying the standards of 
DCID 1/14. These guidelines apply to the adjudication of cases involving persons 
being considered for first time access to Sensitive Compartmented Information (SCI) 
as well as those cases of persons being readjudicated for continued SCI access. 


ADJUDICATIVE PROCESS 


The ‘adjudicative process entails the examination of a sufficient period of a 
person’s life to make a determination that the person is not now or is not likely to later 
become an unacceptable security risk. SCI access adjudication is the careful weighing 
of a number of variables known as the “whole person” concept. The recency of 
occurrence of any adverse incident, together with circumstances pertaining thereto, is 
central to a fair and uniform evaluation. Key factors to be considered inadindication 
are the maturity and responsibility of the person at the time certain acts or violations 
were committed as well as any repetition or continuation of such conduct. Each case 
must be judged on its own merits and final determination remains the responsibility of 
the individual SIO. Any doubt concerning personnel having access to SCI shall be = 
resolved in favor of the national security. 


The ultimate determination of whether the granting of SCI access is clearly 
consistent with the interests of national security shall be an overall common sense 
determination based on all available information. In arriving at a decision consistent 
with the foregoing, the adjudicator must give careful scrutiny to the following matters: 
Rovdlie °  h oe 
b. Close relatives and associates 
c. Homosexual conduct and sexual perversion 
d. Cohabitation 
e. Undesirable character traits 
f. Financial irresponsibility 
g. Alcohol abuse 

h. Hlegal drugs and drug abuse 

i. Emotional and mental disorders 

j. Record of law violations 

k. Security violations 


Adjudicative actions concerning the foregoing items are examined in greater 
detail below. 


LOYALTY 
DCID 1/14 establishes the categorical requirement that, to be eligible for SCI 
access, an individual must be of unquestioned _] i es. 
9 


Approved For Release 2006/01/03 : CIA-RDP87B01034R000500140005-1 


Wy tie 


re 


Peper pasts IgE 


Approved For Release 2006/01/03 : CIA-RDP87B01034R000500140005-1 


CLOSE RELATIVES AND ASSOCIATES 


DCID 1/14 requires close examination by the SCI adjudicator when members of 
an individual’s immediate family and persons to whom he/she is bound by affection : 
or obligation are not citizens of the United States, or their loyalty or affection is to a aa 
foreign power, or they are subject to any form of duress by a foreign power, or they cae 
advocate the violent overthrow or unconstitutional alteration of the Government of 
the United States. 


The adjudicator must assess carefully the degree of actual and potential influence Se 
that such persons may exercise on the individual based on an examination: of the ae 
frequency and nature of personal contact and correspondence with and the political 
sophistication and general maturity of the individual. 


=> =A recommendation for access disapproval is appropriate if there is an indication : | 


Le that such relatives or associates are connected with any foreign intelligence service. 


When there is a “compelling need” for SCI access for an individual whose family a 
member is a non-U.S. citizen and the background investigation indicates that the | 
security risk is negligible, an exception to paragraph 5b(1), (2) of DCID 1/14 may be 
recommended. 


In some circumstances, marriage of an individual holding SCI access approval 
could present an unacceptable security risk. An individual is required to file an intent - 
to marry and it is the responsibility of the SIO to advise the individual of the possible 
security consequences. If the individual marries a non-U.S. citizen, SCI access will be 
suspended until the case is readjudicated unless an appropriate investigation of the z 
spouse, as required by Paragraph 11L of DCID 1/14, was conducted with favorable 
results. In readjudicating such cases, the same judgments and criteria as reflected in 
this section apply. 


HOMOSEXUAL CONDUCT AND SEXUAL PERVERSION a 


DCID 1/14 requires that, to be eligible for SCI access, individuals must be stable, 
of excellent character and discretion, and not subject to undue influence or duress : 
through exploitable personal conduct. = 


Sexual conduct can be a relevant consideration in circumstances in which the 
conduct indicates a personality disorder or could result iia exposing the individual to 
direct or indirect pressure because of susceptibility to blackmail or coercion as a result 
of the deviant sexual behavior. Such behavior includes: bestiality, fetishism, exhibi- 
tionism, necrophilia, nymphomania or satyriasis, masochism, sadism, pedophilia, 
transvestism, and voyeurism, Homosexual conduct is also to be considered as a factor 
in determining an individual’s stability and susceptibility to undue influence or duress. 


In examining cases involving acts of homosexual conduct or sexual perversion, it is 
relevant to consider the age of the person, the voluntariness, and the frequency of such 
activities, the public nature and the recency of the conduct, as well as any other 
circumstances which may serve to aggravate the nature or character of the conduct. A 

recommendation for disapproval is appropriate when, in view of all available evidence | 
concerning the individual’s history of sexual behavior, it appears that access to SCI 
could pose a risk to the national security. 


10 


Approved For Release 2006/01/03 : CIA-RDP87B01034R000500140005-1 


Approved For Release 2006/01/03 : CIA-RDP87B01034R000500140005-1 


COHABITATION 


Extra-marital cohabitation with a member of the opposite sex, in and of itself, 
does not preclude SCI access approval. 


The identity of a cohabitant must be ascertained and a determination made if 
such association constitutes an unacceptable security risk based on the same criteria as 
in the section dealing with Close Relatives and Associates. Cohabitation with an alien, 
for example, requires the same scrutiny as marriage to an alien. Extra-marital sexual 


relations are also of legitimate concern to the SCI adjudicator when the potential for 
undue influence or duress exists. 
Sona Reco 


UNDESIRABLE CHARACTER TRAITS 


It is emphasized that an individual's lifestyle is examined only in an effort to 
determine whether a pattern of behavior exists which indicates that granting SCI 
access could pose a risk to national security. In cases where allegations have been 
reported which reflect unfavorably on the reputation of an individual, it is incumbent 
upon the SCI adjudicator to distinguish fact from opinion and to determine which 
negative characteristics are real and pertinent to an evaluation of the individual’s 
character and which are unsubstantiated or irrelevant. Relevant negative characteris- 
tics are those which, in the adjudicator’s informed opinion, indicate that an individual 
is not willing, able, or likely to protect SCI information. The adjudicator’s personal 
likes or dislikes must not be permitted to affect the determination. 


Examples of specific concern in determining whcther an individual has undesira- 
ble character traits are any substantive credible derogatory comments by associates, 
neighbors and other acquaintances; any litigation instituted against the individual by 
such persons as a result of the individual’s actions; or allegations of violations of law. A 
recommendation for disapproval would be appropriate for an individual who cannot 
be relied upon to obey rules and regulations. 


In examining the circumstances of cases involving incidents of untruthfulness, the 
ajudicator must weigh all factors with particular emphasis on establishing the intent of 
the individual. Where an individual has tried to obscure pertinent or significant facts 
by falsifying data, i.e. on the Personal History Statement by either omission or false 
entry, such action should be weighed heavily against recommending access. Failure to 
disclose derogatory personal information, such as a court martial or serious crime, 
would appear to be intentional and, consequently, would warrant a recommendation 
for disapproval. , 


FINANCIAL IRRESPONSIBILITY 


Financial irresponsibility represents a serious concern to the SCI adjudicator. 
Persons who have engaged in espionage for monetary gain demonstrate the hazard of 
granting SCI access to an individual with overly expensive tastes and habits or living 
under the pressure of serious debt. 


A recommendation for disapproval is appropriate when there is a pattern of 
financial irresponsibility and it appears that an individual has not made a conscien- 
tious effort to satisfy creditors. In such cases, the adjudicator should determine 
whether the individual had been notified about the debts and whether they were 
legally valid or ultimately satisfied. 


11 


Approved For Release 2006/01/03 : CIA-RDP87B01034R000500140005-1 


eee ee ee 


mea 


wey edge 


: Approved For Release 2006/01/03 : CIA-RDP87B01034R000500140005-1 


When the financial irresponsibility alone is not of such magnitude to warrrant 
disapproval, it may contribute to recommendation for denial of SCI access when there | 
is other evidence of irresponsibility. al 


ALCOHOL ABUSE 


The SCI adjudicator should examine any information developed relative to an 
individual’s use of alcoholic beverages to determine the extent to which such use 
would adversely affect the ability of the individual to excerise the care, judgement, 
and discretion necessary to protect SCI information, The adjudicator should determine 
whether a pattern of impropriety exists, although one incident caused by alcohol abuse 
may be of such magnitude to warant a recommendation for disapproval. 


j In determining the security impact of a person’s pattern of alcohol use, the 
: adjudicator should consider the circumstances, amount and rate of consumption, the a 
time and place of consumption, and the physiological and behavioral effect such 
drinking has on the individual. For example, does the individual’s drinking result in 
absences from work or careless work habits? Does the individual become talkative, 
abusive or manifest other undesirable characteristics? Does the individual drink until 


intoxicated? Has the individual been arrested for any acts resulting from the influence 
of alcohol? 


i In the absence of conclusive evidence, additional insight may be available from 
appropriate medical authorities. If the individual acknowledges having an alcohol 
abuse problem and is seeking help, it may be appropriate to defer access determina- oe 
tion and monitor the individual’s progess for a year or so. . a 


If, after considering the nature and sources of the information, the adjudicator 
determines that an individual’s drinking is not serious enough to warrant a reeommen- ae 
dation for disapproval of SCI access, it may be appropriate to recommend approval 
with a warning at the time of indoctrination that future incidents of alcohol abuse may a 
result in SCI denial. The adjudicator may also recommend a reinvestigation of the 
individual’s use of alcohol after an appropriate period of time has passed. ae 


ILLEGAL DRUGS AND DRUG ABUSE oi 


The SCI adjudicator should examine all allegation of an individual’s use, 
transport, transfer, sale, cultivation, processing and manufacturing of hallucinogens, al 
narcotics, drugs and other materials and chemical compounds identified and listed in 
the Controlled Substance Act of 1970, as amended. Consequently an individual's 
involvement in any of these activities is of direct concern to the SCI adjudicator in 
order to determine the individual’s capability to exercise the care, discretion, and 
judgement required to protect SCI information. The use of these substances may lead 
to varying degrees of physical or psychological dependence as well as having a 
deleterious effect on an individual’s mental state and ability to function. 


Persons involved in drug trafficking, i.e., the commercial cultivation, processing, Ee 
manufacturing, purchase or sale of such substances should normally be recommended a 
for disapproval. hy 


12 


Approved For Release 2006/01/03 : CIA-RDP87B01034R000500140005-1 


a ar is PA 


Approved For Release 2006/01/03 : CIA-RDP87B01034R000500140005-1 


In cases involving the use of drugs, the adjudicator must consider the nature of 
the substance used and whether the use is experimental or habitual. The frequency, 7 
recency and circumstances surrounding said use are key elements. For example, has 
the individual used “hard” drugs or hallucinogens such as heroin, cocaine or LSD? Has 
the individual used drugs regularly or only on occasion? Does the individual currently 
use drugs? Does the individual regularly purchase drugs or participate merely when 
offered drugs by others? Has the individual’s behavior been affected by the use of 
drugs and, if so, to what extent? 


a 


ii fi Wl Le 


Once the judgment is made that an individual is a habitual user of any controlled 
substance (multiple use beyond the point of mere experimentation), a recommenda- 
tion for disapproval is appropriate. Moreover, even experimental use of hard drugs or 
hallucinogens, such as LSD, could warrant a recommendation for disapproval. 


EMOTIONAL AND MENTAL DISORDERS 


DCID 1/14 requires that persons considered for access to SCI be stable and of 
excellent character and discretion. Emotional and mental disorders which interfere 
with an individual’s perception of reality or reliability are of serious concern to the 
SC] adjudicator in determining whether an individual is able or willing to protect SCI 
information. 


5 
= 


It is essential to obtain as much information as possible when an allegation has 
been made in this area. If feasible, the individual should be interviewed to obtain 
additional details. When appropriate, government psychological and psychiatric 
personnel should be consulted so that psychiatric or psychological data may be 
properly evaluated. 


“EU 


—_—_—_——” If a current emotional instability appears to be a temporary condition, for 5 
example, caused by a death, illness or marital breakup, it may be advisable to 
recommend postponing final action and rechecking the situation at a later date. This 
precludes a security disapproval for what may be a temporary condition which, when 
cured, would have no security implications. 


Military and civilian personnel who decline to take medical/psychiatric tests 
when so directed by competent authority should not be recommended for SCI access. 


Wes bleh E 


pag 


RECORD OF LAW VIOLATIONS 


In determining whether an individual is stable, of excellent character and 
discretion as required by DCID 1/14 for access 10 ome adiudicalor must weigh 
carefully any record of law violations by the individual. Although a pattern of 
repeated minor traffic violations could be slenificant, the adjudicator is principally 


concerned with more serious criminal violations or court actions reflecting adversely : 
upon the individual's reliability or trustworthiness. i 
an, = 


a 


Each case involving convictions for criminal offenses must be considered from 
the standpoint of the nature and seriousness of the offense, the circumstances under 
which it occurred, how long ago it occurred, whether it was an isolated offense or a 
repeated violation of the law, the offender’s age at the time, social conditions which 
may have a brearing on the individual actions, and any evidence of rehabilitation. 


if dh 


il 


13 : 


Approved For Release 2006/01/03 : CIA-RDP87B01034R000500140005-1 


Approved For Release 2006/01/03 : CIA-RDP87B01034R000500140005-1 


— Any conviction for a felony will normally support a recommendation for 
disapproval. If the offense was committed many years prior, the individual has shown 
evidence of rehabilitation, and the investigation shows no other derogatory informa- 
tion, an approval may be considered. A large number of minor offenses, however, 


could indicate irresponsibility and_may support_an adverse recommendation. 
he een ee en As PST TRA Pe 


SECURITY VIOLATIONS 


Most security violations are caused by carelessness or ignorance with no intention 
of compromising security. However, the record of an individual responsible for 
multiple violations should be scrutinized. The individual’s current attitude toward 
security should be confirmed with his/her supervisor. A pattern of violations may be 
sufficient ground for a recommendation for disapproval. 


14 


Approved For Release 2006/01/03 : CIA-RDP87B01034R000500140005-1 


foe 


apres, t 
ieee al oe 


poy Rene pH Hehe ARR UHR at ge atta Fei Te Ce 


BE: WON: 


‘Coa gmt oH? BL SERRE E> 


LRP con ugemtet OISHEE 1, 


Approved For Release 2006/01/03 : CIA-RDP87B01034R000500140005-1 


28 September 1981 


ANNEX B 
DCID 1/14 APPEALS 


POLICY 


1. This annex establishes common appeals procedures for the denial or revocation 
of access to Sensitive Compartmented Information (SCI) by entities of the Intelligence 
Community after adjudication pursuant to the provisions of DCID 1/14. This annex is 
promulgated pursuant to Executive Order 12036, Executive Order 12065, Section 102 
of the National Security Act of 1947, and National Security Council Intelligence 
Directive No. 1. For the purpose of this annex, all references to DCID 1/14 include 
the basic document and all of its annexes, Any person who has been considered for ini- 
tial or continued access to SCI pursuant to the provisions of DCID 1/14 shall, to the 
extent provided below, be afforded an opportunity to appeal the denial or revocation 
of such access. This annex supercedes any and all other practices and procedures for 
the appeal of the denial or revocation of SCI access. This annex shall not be construed 
to require the disclosure of classified information or information concerning intelli- 
gence sources and methods, nor shall it be construed to afford an opportunity to 
appeal prior to the actual denial or revocation of SCI access. In addition, the provisions 
of DCID 1/14, this annex, or any other document or provision of law shall not be con- 
strued to create a property interest of any kind in the access of any person to SCI. 
Further, since the denial or revocation of access to SCI cannot by the terms of DCIJD 
1/14 render a person ineligible for access to other classified information soley for that 
reason, the denial or revocation of SCI access pursuant to the provisions of DCID 1/14 
and this annex shall not be construed tocreate a liberty interest of any kind. 


APPLICABILITY 


2. This annex applies to all United States Government civilian and military 
personnel, as well as any other individuals, including contractors and employees of 
contractors, who are considered for initial or continued access to SCI. This annex does 
not apply to decisions regarding employment and shall not be construed to affect or 
impair Public Law 88-290 or the authority of any entity to effect applicant or 
personnel actions pursuant to Public Law 88-290, Public Law 86-36, or other 
applicable law. 


SCI ACCESS DETERMINATION AUTHORITY 


3. Adjudications for access to SCI shall be made in accordance with DCID 1/14 
by a Determination Authority designated by the Senior Intelligence Officer (SIO) of 
each entity. Access to SCI shall be denied or revoked whenever it is determined that a 
person does not meet the security standards provided for in DCID 1/14. 


PROCEDURES 
da. Persons shal] be: 
(1) notified of the denial or revocation of SCI access, 


(2) notified that they may request to be provided the reasons for such denial 
or revocation, and/or 


(3) afforded an opportunity to appeal, 


15 


Approved For Release 2006/01/03 : CIA-RDP87B01034R000500140005-1 


117 a CRAP 


Approved For Release 2006/01/03 : CIA-RDP87B01034R000500140005-1 


whenever the Determination Authority of any entity, in the exercise of his discretion, 
deems such action in any given case to be clearly consistent with the interests of the 
national security. 


. b. Any person who is given notification and afforded an opportunity to appeal 
pursuant to subparagraph a. above may, within 45 days of the date on which such per- 
son is notified of the reasons for denial or revocation of SCI access, submit a written 
appeal of that denial or revocation to the Determination Authority. The written 
material submitted for consideration may include any information which the person 
believes will assist the Determination Authority in reviewing the case. 


c. After a further review of the case in the light of the written appeal, the person 
will be notified of the decision of the Determination Authority. 


d. If the Determination Authority reaffirms a denial or revocation of access, the 
person may request a final review of the case. In that event, the SIO, or his designee, 
shall personally review the case and exercise his discretion pursuant to the provisions 
of DCID 1/14, and shall inform the person of his decision, which shall be final and 
unreviewable. 


16 


Approved For Release 2006/01/03 : CIA-RDP87B01034R000500140005-1 


isl 


icaSGOR RE PRR cat el 


ai ieaphn 


aa 


Care ieee 


