Approved For Relegse 1999/09/08 : CIA-RDP81B0Ga#9R000500020015-3 


INDEX TO GENERAL PRCVISICNS 


Article No. Page No. 
ci DEFENTTUONS Se-2. heh a ge G 1 
2. CEG a oe it Sake ade cc RO aig de a a tae, RE i. 
3. BURAB es 8 ee 2d ae we Spe ae ee oe. fee 2 
i VARIATION IN QUANTDTY. Bde Sorte ce ce 2 
5s INSPECTION .... ae eer 2 
6. RESPONSIBILITY FOR SUPPLIES . b- Sd, eG 3 
ve ASSIGNMENT OF CLAIMS . 2. 1 2 se we er ee 3 
8, ADDITIONAL BOND SECURITY ...... . 4 
9. FEDERAL STATE & LOCAL TAXES. . bers bh 

10. DPW caecd: oh MS) “ide ashe sgenes Gen ae he ee He OR 6 
aka BUY AMERICAN ACT . , . 1 ew ee ew eee 7 
12. EIGHT HOUR LAW OF 1912 .. atin @ 7 
ne WALSH-HEALEY PUBLIC CONTRACTS ACT A igadde a 8 
4. NONDISCRIMINATICN IN EMPLOYMENT ..... 8 
15% OFFICIALS NOT TO BENEFIT... .. +s. 9 
16. COVENANT AGAINST CONTINGENT FEES 9 
Aes - ATRCRAFT IN THE OPEN... et en aie a 9 
18. MILITARY SECURITY REQUIREMENTS coe . 72: 
19. UTILIZATION OF SMALL BUSINESS CONCERNS. cs 13 
20, EXAMINATION OF RECORDS... . ee. ae 13 
21. GRATIS TPES: «5 ig, ope ees ae viel. tee a> cat eg 8 ee Ss 13 
22. CONVICT LABOR . . : i, unre 
23. NOTICE & ASSISTANCE REGARDING PATENT. 

INFRINGEMENT . 2. 1 1 ee ee we ew oe 14 
eu. REPORTING OF ROYALTIES bee a ace ee! 14 
25. - FILING OF PATENT APPLICATIONS . . . 6. 16 
26. AUTHORIZATION & CONSENT . 2. 2 0 ee eee 17 
27. PATENT RIGHTS. <2 s. © @o¥ 8 Soe wee @ 17 
28. COPYRIGHT . . «> é F A 22 
29. REPRODUCTION AND USE OF TECHNICAL DATA ‘ 2 
30. GCVERNMENT FURNISHED PROPERTY ...... 2 
cule TERMINATION FOR CONVENIENCE OF THE 

GOVERNMENT 274. -a. Ac pr ae ce ey. le aT 
32. PAYMENTS. go io se SG Ee Gl ees Weel Gok a 31 
33. DEFAULT . . 6 « i iin GS ee ae ae ee 32 
3h. ALTERATIONS IN CONTRACT 6s wiewtae Fonts oe Oa ae 33 


Approved For Release 1999/09/08 : CIA-RDP81B00879R000500020015-3 


Approved For Retgdse 1999/09/08 : CIA-RDP81B08@79R000500020015-3 


GENERAL PROVISIONS 


1. DEFINITIONS 


As used throughout this contract, the following terms shall 
have the meanings set forth below: 


(a) The term "Secretary" means the Secretary, the Under Secre- 
tary, or any Assistant Secretary of the Department and the head or 
any assistant head of the oxecutive agency; and the tern “his duly 
authorized representative" means any person or persons or board (other 
than the Contracting Officer) authorized to act for the Secretary ,and 
the tern "Departuent" means that cortponent cf the Government having 
cognizance of this contract and represented by the Contracting Officer 
executing this contract. 


(b) The term "Contracting Officer" means the person cxecuting 
this contract on behalf of the Government, and any other officer or 
civilian employce who is a properly designated Contracting Officer, 
and the term includes, except as otherwise provided in this contract, 
the authorized representative of a Contracting Officer acting within 
the limits of his authority. 


(c) Except as otherwise provided in this contract, the term 
"subcontracts" ineludes purchase orders under this contract. 


(4) The term "contract work" means all work to be perforned 
under this contract including any studies covering fundamental, theo- 
retical, or experimental investigations; any extension of the inves- 
tigative findings and theorics of a seientific and technical nature 
into practical application; any tangible terns, hereinafter referred 
to as supplies, if called for herein, furnished to the Governnuent ; 
and any reports, data, computations, plans, drawings, and specifica- 
tions with respect to the foregoing. 


2. CHANGES 


The Contracting Officer may at any time, by a written order, and 
without notice to the sureties, make changes, within the general scope 
of this contract, in any one or more of the following: (i) drawings, 
designs, or specifications, where the supplics to be furnished are to 
be specially manufactured for the Governiuent in accordance therewith; 
(ii) method of shipment or packing; and (iii) place of delivery. If 
any such change causes an increase or decrease in the cost of, cr the 
tine required for, performance of this contract, an equitable adjust- 
ment shall be nade in the contract price or delivery schedule, or 
both, and the contract shall be modified in writing accordingly. Any 
claim by the Contractor for adjustment under this clause must be as- 
serted within 60 days from the date of receipt by the Contractor cf 
the notification ef change; PROVIDED, however, that the Contracting 


Approved For Release 1999/09/08 : CIA-RDP81B00879R000500020015-3 


Price Rev. 


eee eR = 


iO REE. 


Approved For Relligée 1999/09/08 : CIA-RDP81B00W#9R000500020015-3 


Officer, if he decides that the facts justify such action, may receive 
and act upon any such claim asserted at any tine prior to final pay- 
nent under this contract. Failure to agree to any adjustment shall 
be a dispute concerning a question of fact within the neaning of the 
clause of this contract entitled "Disputes." However, nothing in 
this clause shall excuse the Contractor from proceeding with the ccn- 
tract as changed. 


3. EXTRAS 


Except as otherwise provided in this contract, no paynent for 
extras shall be made unless such extras and the price therefor have 
been authorized in writing by the Centracting Cfficer. 


4. VAPIATION IN QUANTITY 


No variation in the quantity of any item called for by this con- 
tract will be accepted unless such variation has been caused by con- 
ditions of loading, shipping, or packing, or allowances in manufac- 
turing processes, and then owly to the extent, if any, specified 
elsewhere in this contract. 


5. INSPECTION 


(a) All supplies (which tern throughout this clause includes _ 
without limitation raw materials, components, intermediate assemblies, 
and end products) shall be subject to inspection and test by the Gov- 
ermicnt, to the extent practicable at all times and places including 
the period of manufacture, and in any event prior to final acceptance. 


(b>) In case any supplies or lots of supplics are defective in 
material er workmanship or otherwise not in conformity with the re- 
quirements of this contract, the Government shall have the right 
elther to reject then (with’ or without instructions as to their dis- 
position) or to require their correction. Supplies or lots of sup- 
Plies which have been rejected or required to be corrected shall be 
removed or corrected in place, as requested by the Contracting Officer, 
by and at the expense of the Contractor promptly after notice, and 
shall not again be tendered for acceptance unless the forner tender and 
either the rejeetion or requirement of correction is disclosed. If 
the Contractor fails promptly to remove such supplics or lots of sup- 
plics, when requested by the Contracting Officer, and to proceed 
promptly with the replacement or correction thereof, the Governnent 
either (i) nay by contract or otherwise replace or correct such sup- 
plies and charge to the Contractor the cost occasioned the Government 
thereby, or (ti) nay terminate this contract for default as provided 
in the clause of this contract entitled "Default", Unless the Con- 
tractor elects to correct or replace the supplies which the Government 
has a right to reject and is able to make such correction or replace- 
ment within the required delivery schedule, the Contracting Officer 
may require the delivery of such supplies at a reduction in Brier 


- 


Approved For Release 1999/09/08 : CIA- RDP81 B00879R000500020015- 3 
FP (oct. 8, 1956) =e een 
Price Rev, ee 


toc satiate aban yastat 4 abaal 


eet 


gE 


Approved For Relfage 1999/09/08 : CIA-RDP81B00e#9R000500020015-3 


sain Seah a 


which is equitable under the circurstances. Failure to agree to such 
reduction of price shall be a dispute concerning a question of fact 
within the meaning of the clause of this contract entitled "Disputes". 


(ce) If any inspection or test is made by the Government on the 
premises of the Contractor or a subcontractor, the Contractor without 
additional charge shall provide all reasonable facilitics and assist- 
anee for the safety and convenience of the Government inspectors in 
the performance of their duties. If Government inspection or test is 
nade at a poiat other than the premises of the Contractor er a sub- 
contractor, it shall be at the expense of the Government, PROVIDED, 
that in case of rojection the Government shall not be liable fer any 
reduction in value of samples used in connection with such inspection 
or test. All inspecticns and tests by the Government shall be per~ 
formed in such a wanner as not to unduly delay the work. ‘he Govern- 
ment reserves the right to charge to the Contractor any additienal 
cost of Government inspection and test when supplies are net ready at 
the time such inspection and test is requested by the Contractor. Final 
acceptance or rejection of the supplies shall be made as promptly as 
practicable after delivery, except as otherwise provided in this con- 
tract; but failure to inspect and accept or reject supplics shall 
neither relieve the Contractor fron responsibility for such supplics 
as are not in accordance with the contract requirements nor impose 
liability on the Government therefor, 


(ad) The inspection and test by the Government of any supplies 
or lots thereof does not relieve the Contractor from.any responsibility 
regarding defects or other failures to nect the contract requirements 
which may be disccvered prior to final acceptance. Except as other- 
wise provided in this contract, final acceptance shall be conclusive 
except as regards latent defects, fraud, or such gross mistakes as 
amount to fraud. 


(e) The Contractor shall provide and maintain an inspection 
system acceptable to the Government covering the supplies hereunder. 
Records of all inspection work by the Contractor shall be kept con- 
plete and available to the Government duxtng-the performance of this 
contract and for such longer period as may be specified elsewhere in 
this contract. 


6. RESPONSIBILITY FOR SUPPLIES 


Except as otherwise provided in this contract, (i) the Contractor 
shall be responsible for the supplies covered by this contract until 
they are delivered at the designated delivery point, regardless of 
the point of inspection, and (ii) the Contractor shall bear all 
risks as to rejected work after notice of rejection. 


7. ASSIGNMENT OF CLAIMS 


' {a) Pursuant to the provisions of the Assignnent of Claims Act 
of 1940 as amended (31 U.S. Code 203, 41 U.S, Code 15), if this 


APREQVeS For Release 1999/09/08 3 CIA-RDP81B00879R000500020015-3 


Price Rev. 


« 


; _ Approved For Relailse 1999/09/08 : CIA-RDP81B04e#9R000500020015-3 : 


J - ¢ontract provides for payments aggregating $1,000 or more, clains 
for moneys due or to become due to the Contractor from the Govern- 
ment under this comtract uay be assigned to a bank, trust company, 
or other financing institution, ineluding any Federal lending agency, 
and may thereafter be further assigned and reassigned to any such 
institution. Any such assignment or reassignment shall caver all 
amounts payable under this contract and not already paid, and shall 
not be made to more than one party, except that any such assignment 
or reassignnent may be wade to one party as agent or trustee for two 
er tore parties participating in such financing. Notwithstanding any 
provision of this contract, payment to an assignee of any meneys due 
or to become due under this contract shall not, to the extent provided 
in said Act as amended, be subject to reduction or sct-cff. 


(b) In no event shall copies of this contract or of any plans, 
specifications, er other similar documents relating to work under 
this contract, if sarked "TOP SECRET," "SECRET," “CONFIDENTIAL, " 
be furnished to any assignee of any claim arising under this contract 
or to any other person not entitled to receive the same; PROVIDED, 
that a copy of any part or all of this contract se marked nay be fur- 
nished, or any information contained thercin nay be disclosed, to such 
assignee upon the prior written authorization of the Contracting Cfficer 


(ce) The Contractor shall obtain the written authorization of 
the Contracting Officer prior to the assignment of any rights under 
this contract. 


8, ADDITIONAL BOND SECURITY 


If any surety upon any bond furnished in connection with this 
contract becomes unacceptable to the Government, or if any such 
surety fails to furnish reports as to his financial condition from 
time to time as requested by the Government, the Contractor shall 
promptly furnish such additional security as may be required fron 
tine to time to protect the interests of the Government and of per- 
sons @upplying labor or materials in the prosecution of the work 
contemplated by this contract. 


9. FEDERAL, STATE ANY LOCAL TAXES 


(a) DEFINITIONS. As used throughout this clause, the following 
terms shall have the neanings sect forth below: 


(4) The tern "direct tax” means any tax or duty 
directly applicable to the completed supplies or 
services (as distinguished from taxes directly ap- 
plicable to materials and components used in the 
manufacture or furnishing of the completed supplies 
or services) covered by this contract cr any other 
ae, tax or duty from which the Contractor or this trans- 


, 


iy Tn mntucctton. is exempt. It includes any tax or duty dircctly a 
~—~"APPIOVECF di Releasé 1999/09/08 . CIA-RDP81B00879R000500020015-3 . 
Price Rev. ar ee = 


Seep 
‘ Me 
: Sas, 


for ae 


cS 


Approved For Refgjse 1999/09/08 : CIA-RDP81 Bodel9R000500020015-3 ~ 


applicable to the iuportation, production, processing, 
manufacture, construction, sale, or use of such sup- 
plies or services; it alse includes any tax levied on, 
with respect to, or measured by sales, receipts from 
sales, or use of the supplies or services covered by 
this contract. The term does not include transpertation 
taxes, unemployment compensation taxes, social security 
taxes, income taxes, excess profits taxes, capital stock 
taxes, property taxes, and such other taxes as are not 
within the definition of the term "direct tax" as set 
forth above in this paragraph. 


(11) The term “contract date" means the effective 
date of this contract if it is a negotiated contract 
or the date set for the opening of bids if it is a 
contract entered into as a result of formal advertising. 
For the purpose of any additional procurement of supplics 
or services called for by any agreement supplemental 
hereto, the term "contract date" shall refer to the date 
of such supplemental agreement. 


(b) FEDERAL TAXES, Except as may be otherwise provided in this 
contract, the contract price includes all applicable Federal taxes in 
effect en the contract date. 


(c) STATE OR LOCAL TAXES. Except as may be otherwise provided 
in this contract, the contract price does not include any State or 
Local direct tax in effect cn the contract date. 


(da) EVIDENCE OF EXEMPTION: The Government agrees, upon request 
af the Contracter, unless there exists no legal basis to sustain an 
exemption, to furnish a Tax Exemption Certificate or other similar 
evidence ef exemption with respect to any direct tax not included in 
the contract price pursuant to this clause; and the Contractor agrees, 
in the event of the refusal of the applicable taxing authority to ac- 
cept such evidence of exemption, (1) promptly to notify the Contracting 
Officer of such refusal, (ii) to cause the tax in question to be paid 
in such manner as to preserve all rights to refund thereof, and (iii) 
if so directed by the Contracting Officer, to take all necessary action, 
in cooperation with and for the benefit of the Government, to secure 
e refund of such tax (in which event the Government agrees to reim- 
burse the Contractor for any and all reasonable expenses incurred at 
ite direction). 


(e) PRICE ADJUSTMENT. If, after the contract date, (i) the 
Federal Government or any State or local government either impcses 
or increases (or removes an exemption with respect to) any direct 
tax, or any tax directly applicable to the materials cr components 
used in the manufacture or furnishing of the completed supplies or 
services covered by this contract, or (ii) the Federal Government or 
any State or local government refuses to accept the evidence of exemp- 
‘tion, furnished under paragraph (a) hereof, with respect to any direct 


FP (ect. 8, 1956 : 
SF sored For peldage 1999/09/08 5 CIA-RDP81 B00879R000500020015-3 me 


%. 


i pe cama ae be a ein See ear 


p 


r 


". Approved For Relgiise 1999/09/08 : CIA-RDP81B08eH9R000500020015-3 


tax excluded from the contract price, or (iii) the Federal. Government 
Goes not furnish a tax excmption certificate or other similar evidence 
of exemption with respect to any direct tax excluded frem the contract 
price, and if under either (1), (11), or (411i) the Contracter is 
obliged to and does pay or bear the burden of any such tax (and does 
hot secure a refund therecf), the contract price shall be ecrrespondingly 
increased, and if interest and penalties are incurred by reason of 
delay in payment of such tax on the instruction of the Contracting 
Officer, and sush interest and penalties are legally imposed, the ccn- 
tract price shall be correspondingly increased, If, after the contract 
fete, vhe Contractor is relieved in whole or in part from the payment 
or the burden of any direct tax included in the contract price, or any 
tax directly applicable to the materials or components used in the 
tMenufacture or furnishing of the completed supplies or services covered 
by this contract, the Contractor agrees promptly to notify the Contrac- 
ting Officer of such relief, and the contract price shall be corres- 
poudingly decreased or the amount of such relief paid over to the 
Government. Inveices or vouchers covering any increase or decrease 
in centract price pursuant to the provisions of this paragraph shall 
Btate the amount thereof, as a separate added or deducted item, and 
Bhall identify the particular tax imposed, increased, eliminated, or 
decreased 
‘ ; . at 
(£) REFUND OR DRAWBACK. If any tax or duty has been included 
in the contract price cr the price as adjusted under paragraph (e) of 
this clause, and if the Contractor is entitled to a refund or drawback 
by reason of the export or re-export of supplies covered by this cen- 
tract, or of materials or components used in the manufacture or fur- 
tishing of the completed supplies or services covered by this contract, 
the Contractor agrees that he will promptly notify the Contracting 
Officer thereof and that the amount of any such refund or drawback 
obtained will be paid over to the Government or credited against amounts 
due from the Government under this contract, PROVIDED, however, that 
the Contractor shall not be required to apply for such refund or draw- 
back unless so requested by the Contracting Officer. 


10 = DISPUTES 


Except as otherwise provided in this eontract, any dispute con- 
Gerning a question cf fact arising under this contract which is not 
disposed of by agreement shall be decided by the Contracting Officer, 
Who shall reduce his decision to writing and mail or otherwise furnish 
& copy thereof to the Contractor. Within thirty (30) days from the 
date of receipt of such copy, the Contractor may appeal by mailing or 
otherwise furnishing to the Contracting Officer a written appeal ad- 
Gressed to the Sccretary, and the decision of the Secretary ov his 
Guly authorized representative for the hearing of such appeals shall, 
Unless determined by a court of competent jurisdiction to have been 
fraudulent or capricious or arbitrary or so grossly erroneous as neces- 
sarily to imply bad faith, or not supported by substantial evidence, be 
final and conclusive: PROVIDED, That, if no such appeal is taken, the 
decision of the Contracting Officer shall be final and conclusive In 


FP Appreved.kor Release 1999/09/08 : CIA-RDP81B00879R000500020015-3 


Price Rev. ~ G- Z 


ge 


a 


ot ae Pop je) her rer pie gap ag 
t i | PoP 38 Shy 
= | oy 


, 


Approved For Relli&e 1999/09/08 : CIA-RDP81 Bodi#eR000500020015-3 


connection with any appeal proceeding under this elause, the Contractor - 
shall be afforded an opportunity to be heard and to offer evidence in = 
support of its appeal. Pending final decision of a dispute hereunder, 
the Contractor shall proceed diligently with the performance of the 
contract and in accoraance with the Contracting Cfficer's decision. 


11. BUY AMERICAN Act | 


The Contractor agrees that there will be delivered under this con- = 
‘tract only such unmanufactured articles, materials and supplies (which 
term “articles, materials and supplies” is hereinafter referred to in _ 
this clause as "supplies") as have been mined or produced in the United 
States, and only such manufactured supplies as have been manufactured 
in the United States substantially all from supplies mined, produced 
% or manufactured, as the case may be, in the United States. Pureuant 
to the Buy American Act (41 U. S. Code l0a-d), the foregeing provision 
shall not epply (i with respect to supplies excepted by the Secretary 
from the application of that Acts (41) with respect to supplies for vse 
outside the United States, or (iii) with respect to the supplies to be 
delivered under this contract which are of a class or kind determined by 
the Secretary or his duly authorized representative not to be mined, pro- 
duced, or manufactured, as the case may be, in the United States in suf- 
ficient and reasonably available commercial quantities and of a satis- 
factory quality, or (iv) with respect to such supplies from which the 
supplics to be delivered under this ccnutract are manufactured, as are 
cf a class or kind, determined by the Secretary or his duly authorized 
representative not to be mined, produced, or manufactured, as the case 
may be, in the United States in sufficient and reasonably available com- 
mercial quantities and of a satisfactory quality: PROVIDED, That this 
exception (iv) shall not permit delivery cf supplies manufactured out- 
side the United States if such supplies are manufactured in the United = 
States in sufficient and reasonably available commercial quantities and = 
of a satisfactory quality. 


12, EIGHT-~HCUR LAW OF 1912 


This contract, to the extent that it is of a character specified 2 
in the Hight-Hour Law of 1912 as amended (40 U. 8. Code 324-326) and 
is not covered by the Walsh-Healey Public Contracts Act (41 U. 5S. Code 
35-45) is subject to the following provisions and exceptions of said 
Eight-Hour Law of 1912 as amended, and to all other provisions and ex- 
ceptions of said Law. i 


No laborer or mechanic doing any part cf the work contempla- 
ted. by this contract, in the employ of the Contractor er any sub- 
contractor contracting for any part of the said work shall be re- 
quired cr permitted to work more than eight hours in any one cal- 
endar day upon such work, except updm thelcondition that cempen- 
sation is paid to such laborer or mechanic in accordance with the si 
provisions of this clause. The wages of every such laborer and 
mechanic employed by the Contractor or any subcontractor engaged 
in the performance of this contract shall be computed en a basic day rate of 


FP (Oct.8,.1956) ” ee Ee POD PEI ee aaa — | 
~ Approved For Release 1999/09/08 :7CJA-RDP81B00879R000500020015-3 


Bhi 


_” Approved For Rdtse 1999/09/08 : CIA-RDP81B08#79R000500020015-3 _ 


eight hours per day; and work in excess of eight hours per day is 
permitted only upon the condition that every such laborer and mechanic 
Shall be compensated for all hours worked in excess of eight hours 
per day at not less than one and one-half times the basic rate of 
pay. For each violation of the requirements of this clause a penalty 
of five dollars shall be imposed upon the Contractor for each such 
iaborer or mechanic for every calendar day in which such employee 

is required or permitted to labo: more than eight hours upon said 
work without receiving compensation computed in accordance with this 
clause; and all penalties thus imposed shall be withheld for the use 
and benefit of the Government. 


13. WALSH-HEALEY PUBLIC CONTRACTS ACT 


If this contract is for the manufacture or furnishing of mater- 
tals, supplies, articles or equipment in an amount which exceeds or 
may exceed $10,000 and is otherwise subject to the Walsh-Healey Public 
Contracts Act as amended (41 U. S. Code 35-45), there are hereby incor- 
porated by reference all representations and stipulations required by 
said Act and regulations issued thereunder by the Secretary of Labor, 
such representations and stipulations being subject to all applicable 
rulings and interpretations of the Secretary of Labor which are now 
or nay hereafter be in effect, except that the Contractor shall nes 
be required to include this clause in subcontracts issued hereunder 
When the inclusion of thig clause in a supcontract would jeopardize 
or conflict with the security considerations established in ccmnmec- 
tiou with this contract. ee se ee ey 


; E 

14, NONDISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT Hi 

si I 
eee" tract, the Contractor agrees.not to discriminate against any employee 
or applicant for employment because of race, religion, color, or 
national origin. ‘he aforesaid provision shall include, but nct be 
limited to, the following: employment, upgrading, demotion, or 
transfer; recruitment or recruitment advertising; layoff or termina- 
tion; rates of pay or other forms of compensation; and selecticn 
for training, including apprenticeship. The Contractor agrees to 
post hereafter in conspicuous places, available for employees and 
applicants for employment, notices to be provided by the Contracting 
Officer setting forth the provisions of the nondiscrimination clause. 


pes) The Contractor further agrees to insert the foregoing pre- 
gee vision in all subcontracts issued hereunder, except subcontracts fcr 
Standard commercial supplies or raw materials, and except as insertion 
ef the foregoing provision in a subcontract would jeopardize or con- ia, 
> Zligt with the securlvy tousiderations established in connection with 
rw this contract. 7 eeenoe pou phe 


FP (oct. 8, 1956) 
Price Rev. a oa 


Approved For Release 1999/09/08 : CIA-RDP81B00879R000500020015-3 


pooh dak BD . Se 
it ' i ERG : mo 
fo I 


ee teen Sell 


s ‘ ; * 


:. "° Approved For Reliygbe 1999/09/08 : CIA-RDP81B00qj9R000500020015-3 


ae ice kia aE 


15. OFFICIALS NOT To BENEFIT 


v No member of or Aelegate to Congress, or resident commissioner, 
shall be admitted to any share or part of this contract, or to any 
benefit that may arise therefrom; but this provision shall not be ccn- 

“strued to extend to this contract if made with a corporation for its _ 
general benefit. , FE 


16. COVENANT AGAINST CONTINGENT FEES 


| The Contractor warrants that no person or selling agency has been 
employed or retained to solicit or secure this contract upon an agreement 
or understanding for a commission, percentage, brokerage, or contingent 
fee, excepting bona fide employees or bona fide established commercial =. 
of selling agencies maintained by the contractor for the purpose of 
securiug business, For breach or violation of this warranty the Govern- er 
ment shall have the right to annul this centract without liability or in 
its discretion to deduct from the contract price or consideration the 
full omount of such commission, percentage, brokerage, or contingent fee. 


this contract is a negotiated fixed-price type cf contract for 
or modification of aircraft (cor missiles having the general 
ies of aircraft ) the clause set forth below shall apply: 


}ect to the definitions and limitations prescribed in 
this clause, the GoVernment assumes the risk of damage to or loss cr 
destruction of alreraft™yor missiles having the general characteristics 
ef aircraft) in the open; OVIDED, that such damage, less, or destruc- 
tion is caused by any of the icwing perils; 


(1) Fire; lightning, winds » cyclone, tornade, hail; explosion; 
‘riot, riot attending a strike, civil cdmyotion, vandalism and malicious 
mischief; sabotage; aircraft or objects fahling therefrom, vehicles running 
on land or tracks, excluding vehicles owned Onoperated by the Contractor 
or any agent or employee of the Contractor; smoke; earthquake or volcanic 
eruption; flood, meaning thereby rising of a body oRKwwater, hostile or 
warlike action, including action in hindering, combat? er defending 
against an actual, impending or expected attack by any government or 


(ii) Other peril of a type not SdHbove, if such other pert 
is customarily covered by insurance (or BY A reserve for self-insurance) 
in accordaace with the normal practice of the Contractor, or a prevailing 


practice in the industry in which the Contractor i8 engaged with respect 


ny 


Ww) FP (Oct. 8, 1956) fe 
Price Rev. S' One 7 


Approved For Release 1999/09/08 : CIA-RDP81B00879R000500020015-3 


‘Approved For Ré&ighse 1999/09/08 : CIA-RDP81Bie#79R000500020015-3 


” 


0 For purposes of this clause: be ees 


(i) The term “Aircraft" means aircraft to be furnished to 
the Government under this contract, including complete aircraft; and 
@irerSft in the course of manufacture or modification, including en- 
‘@ines, Ynstruments, subassemblies, parts, and equipment installed 
therein, ‘er in process of installation, and all uninstalled property 
‘withdrawn om stores for installation in aircraft in the open or 
temporarily xemoved from such aircraft, provided such uninstalled pro- 
‘perty is in the open. 


(11) Te term "in the open" means located wholly outside of 
buildings or roofeA& structures. 


(c) The Govéxnment's obligation under this clause shall extend 
only to aircraft in the\open under conditions approved by the Contrac- 
ting Cfficer, and shall nyt extend to the following: 


: 


(i) loss, destructhon, or damage resulting from failure of 
‘the Contractor, due to willful\misconduct or lack of good faith of any 
of the Contractor's managerial personnel, to maintain and administer a 
program for the maintenance, repay, protection, and preservation of 
alreratt, in the open, in accordancc\with sound industrial practice. The 
term "Coutractor's managerial persondel" means the Contractor's directors, 
officers, and any of its managers, supsrintendents, or other equivalent 
representatives who have supervision or Qirection of all or substantially 
all of the Contractor's business, or all substantially all of the 
Contractor's operation at any one plant or Separate locatien at which 
this contract is performed, or a separate and\complete major industrial 
operation in connection with the performance oK this contract; 


4 


(ii) loss, destruction or damage to aireyaft in the possession 
or control of any subcontractor, except to the extchkt that the subcon- 
tract, with the approval of the Contracting Officer ad consistent with 
this clause, may otherwise provide. 


(4) The Contractor warrants that the contract price does not 
and will not include any charge or regerve for insurance (id¢luding 
self-insurance funds or reserves) covering damage to or loss Ww destruc- 
tion of aircraft in the open caused by any of the perils set fdxth in 
paragraph (a) hereof. 


(e) In the event of damage to or loss or AGstiruction of aik- 
eraf> in the open, the Contractor shall take all reasonable steps to 
protect such aireeare EEO Shee : magyste damaged and undam- 
‘ppesible order, and furnish 


to ihe Contract tip Officer a eee 


(i) the lost, destroyed, or denn eet aaeenarts 
Le the time and origin of the loss, destruction, er damage; 
iii) all known interests in acne Proee of which 


> = fy are TSS srs Or EE seeaners 


FP (Oct. 8, 1956) 
Frépproved For Release 1999/09/08 x0CIA- RDP81B00879R000500020015-3_ ° 


if ; aa 


“ me er ee ‘ Beil ! cae 7. 


+ 


Approved For Relygbe 1999/09/08 : CIA-RDP81B00@#9R000500020015-3 


: s if-any, eovering-any~-part—of. the interest 
in such commingled property. 


The Contractor shall be reimbursed for expenditures made by it in 
pexforming its obligations under this paragraph, to the extent approved 
by the Contracting Officer and this contract shall be modified in writ- 


in the open is lost, destroyed, or damaged due to any of 
forth in paragraph (a) hereof, the Government may, unless 
ad in this contract, elect to require that such aircraft 
be replaced by thd\Contractor or restored by the Contractor to the condi- 
tion in which it was\immediately prior to such damage. If the Government 
requires the aircraft te be replaced or restored, an equitable adjust- 
ment shall be made in ths amount due under this contract and in the time 
required for its performamse, and this cantract shall be modified in 
writing accordingly. Altermatively, the Government may elect to termi- 
uate this contract as to any sgh lost, destroyed, or damaged aircraft, 
and in that event the rizhts of “he parties shall be as provided in the 
clause entitled Termination for Cohyenience of the Government. 


(g) In the event the Contractor is at any time reimbursed or 
compensated by any third person for any Gamage to or loss or destruction 
of any aircraft in the cpen caused by any peril set forth in paragraph 
(a) hereof for which the Contractor has been ompensated by the Govern- 
ment, it shall equitably reimburse the Governm’at. The Contractor shall 
do nothing to prejudice the Government's rights recover against 
third parties for any such loss, destruction or daMgge and, upon the 
request of the Contracting Officer, shall at the Govéxsnment's expense, 
furnish to the Government all reasonable assistance and\cooperation 

including the prosecution of suit and the execution of Istruments of 
assignment or subrogation in favor of the Government) in ob¥aining re- 
covery. 


(h) Any loss or destruction of, or damage to, preperty Xur- 
nished by the Government will be governed by the clause of this cor 
tract entitled "Govermment-Furnished Property," to the extent that 
such clause is, by its terms, applicable. 


(i) Any loss, or destruction cf, or damage to, aircraft oc- 
curring in connection with operations of said aircraft will be governed 

_ by the clause of this contract entitled "Flight Risk," to the extent 
that such-ciause-is; by its-terms ;- applicabte -——-—-~» ————________. —>s 


18. MILITARY SECURITY REQUIREMENTS 


| (a) The provisions of this clause shall apply to the extent that 
this contract involves access to security information classificd "Con- 
fidential"” including “Confidential - Modified Handling Authorized” or 
higher. 


FP (Oct. 8, 1956) 
‘Price Rev. 


Approved For Release 1999/09/08 CiA-RDP81 B00879R000500020015-3 


i ee 7 a 


+ 


(bo) The Government shall notify the Contractor of the security 
classification of this ecntract and the elements thereof, and of any 
subsequent revisions in such security classification, by the use of a 
Security Requirements Check List (DD Form 254 and 25-1). 


(c) To the extent the Government has indicated as of the date 

of this contract, or thereafter indicates, security classification under 
this contract as provided in paragraph (b) above, the Contractor shall 
safeguard all classified elements of this contract and shall provide and 
maintain a system of security controls within its own organization in 
accordance with the requirements of: 


(1) the Security Agreement (DD Form 41), including the Department 
of Defense Industrial Security Manual for Safeguarding Classified Infor- 
mation as in effect on date of this contract, and any modification to 
the Security Agreement for the purpose of adapting the Manual to the 
Contractor's business; and 


(41) any amendments to said Manual made after the date of this 
contract, notice of which has been furnished to the Contractor by the 
Security Office of the Military Department having security cognizance 
over the facility. : 


(a) Representatives of the Military Department having security 
cognizance over the facility and representatives of the contracting 
Military Department shall have the right to inspect at reasonable inter- 
vals the procedures, methods, and facilities utilized by the Contractor 
in complying with the security requirements under this contract. Should 
the Government, through its authorized representative, determine that 
the Contractor has not complied with such requirements, the Government 
' Shall inform the Contractor in writing of the proper actions to be 
taken in order to effect compliance with such requirements. 


(e) If, subsequent to the date of this contract, the security 
classifications or requirements under this contract are changed by 
the Government as provided in this clause and the security costs under 
this contract are thereby increased or decreased, the contract price 
shall be subject to an equitable adjustment by reason of such increased 
or decreased costs, Any equitable adjustment shall be accomplished in 
the same manner as if such changes were directed under the "Changes" 
clause in this contract. 


(f) The Contractor agrees to insert, in all subcontracts hereunder 
which involve access to classified security information, provisions which 
shall conform substantially to the language of this clause, including 
this paragraph (f) but excluding the last sentence of paragraph (¢) of 
this clause. 


(g) The Contractor also agrees that it shall determine that any 
subcontractor proposed by it for the furnishing of supplies and ser- 
vices which will involve access to classified information in the Con- 

tractor's custody has been granted an appropriate facility security 


FP (Oct. 8, 1956) 
Price Rev. m [Ps 


Approved For Release 1999/09/08 : CIA-RDP81B00879R000500020015-3 


Approved For Refigise 1999/09/08 : CIA-RDP81B04g#9R000500020015-3 


Approved For Relggse 1999/09/08 : CIA-RDP81B0g99R000500020015-3 | 


clearance, which is still in effect, prior to being accorded access 
to such classified security information. 


i9. UTILIZATION OF SMALL BUSINESS CONCERNS 


(a) It is the policy sf the Government as declared by the Con- 
gress to bring about the greatest utilization of small business con- 
cerns which is consistent with efficient production. 


(b) ‘he Contractor agrees to accomplish the maximum amount of 
subcontracting to small business concerns that the Contractor finds 
to be consistent with the efficient performance of this contract. 


20, EXAMINATION OF RECORDS 


The following clause will be applicable in all negotiated fixed- 
price supply contracts and purchase arders in excess of $1,000. 


EXAMINATION OF RECORDS 


(a) the Contractor agrees that the Contracting Officer or any 
of his duly authorized representatives shall, until the expiration 
of three years after final payment under this contract, have access 
to and the right to examine any directly pertinent books, documents, 
papers and records of the Contractor involving transactions related 
to this contract. 


(b) The Contractor further agrees to include in all his sub- 
contracts hereunder a provision to the effect that the subcontracter 
agrees that the Contracting Officer or any of his duly authorized 
representatives shall, until the expiration of three years after 
final payment under the subcontract, have access to and the right to 
examine any directly pertinent books, documents, papers, and records 
of such subcontractor involving transactions related to the subcon- 
tract. The term "subcontract" as used in this clause excludes (i) 
purchase orders not exceeding $1,000 and (ii) subcontracts or pur- 
chase orders for public utility services at rates established for 
uniform applicability to the general public. 


al. GRATUITIES 


(a) The Government may, by written notice to the Contractor, 
terminate the right of the Contractor to proceed under this contract 
if it is found, after notice and hearing, by the Secretary or his 
duly authorized representative, that gratuities (in the form of 
entertainment, gifts, or otherwise) were cffered or given by the 
Contractor, or any agent or representative of the Contractor, to any 
_ officer or employee of the Government with a view toward securing a 
contract or securing favorable treatment with respect to the awarding 
. or amending, or the making of any dcterminations with respect to the 
i performance of such contract; PROVIDED, That the existence of the 
facts upon which the Secretary or his duly authorized representative 


ER ppréved For Release 1999/09/08 : CIA-RDP81B00879R000500020015-3 


Price Rev. -~ 13 - 


bob He 


Approved For Relggse 1999/09/08 : CIA-RDP81B06g#9R000500020015-3 


makes such findings shall be in issue and may be reviewed in any com- 
petent court. 


(ob) In the event this contract is terminated as provided in 
paragraph (a) hereof, the Government shall be entitled (i) to pursue 
the same remedies against the Contractor as it could pursue in the event 
of a breach of the contract by the Contractor, an@ (ii) as a penalty in 
addition to any other damages to which it may be entitled by law, tc 
exemplary damages in an amount (as determined by the Secretary or his 
duly authorized representative) which shall be not less than three nor 
more than ten times the costs incurred by the Contractor in providing 
any such gratuities to any such officer or employee. 


(c) The rights and remedies of the Government provided in this 
clause shall not be exclusive and are in addition to any other rights 
and remedies provided by law or under this contract 


22. CONVICT LABOR 


In connection with the performance of work under this contract, 
the Contractor agrees not to employ any person undergoing sentence of 
imprisonment at hard labor. 


23. NOTICE AND ASSISTANCE REGARDING PATENT INFRINGEMENT 


The provisions of this clause shall be applicable only if the 
amount of this contract is in excess of $5,000. 


(a) The Contractor shall report to the Contracting Cfficer, 
promptly and in reascnable written detail, each notice or claim of 
patent infringement based on the performance of this contract of which 
the Contractor has knowledge. 


(b) In the event of litigation against the Government on account 
of any claim of patent infringement arising out of the performance of 
this centract cr cut of the use of any supplies furnished or work or 
services performed hereunder, the Contractor shall furnish to the 
Government, upon request, all evidence and information in possession 
of the Contractor pertaining to such litigation. Such evidence and 
informatien shell be furnished at the expense of the Government except 
in those cases in which the Contractor has agreed to indemnify the 
Government against the claim being asserted. 


ah, REPORTING OF ROYALTIES 


The provisions ef this clause shall be applicable cnly if the 
amount of the contract is in excess of $10,000, 


(a) The Contractor shall report in writing (in quadruplicate) to 
the Contracting Officer as soon as practicable after execution cf this 
contract whether or not any royalties in excess of $250 have been paid 


FP (Oct. 8, 1956) 
Price Rev. . -Lh - 


Approved For Release 1999/09/08 : CIA-RDP81B00879R000500020015-3 


"Approved For Reliiflse 1999/09/08 : CIA-RDP81B00M#9R000500020015-3 


Gr are to be paid by the Coutractcr @ireetly te any person 
dennection with the pert: ok *hig ecrtract IP roya: 
cess of S250 have tee: paie ov ure vo be pale to any peracuo cy Tirm, che 
report shall include th: followins items ef intoruatica vith rospect ts 
Such royalties (ineludzug the initial $250): 
(1) ‘The name and address <f each licensor te whom reyaities in 
excess og 250 Lave been peid cr sre “9 be raid, 
Ro. @; The patent mumbers, petent application serial rnumeers (with 
Pikines dates), or ctker idertifioution ef the basis for ‘such reyaities, 
(3) The manner cf computing the rcyalties ceusisting cr (4)! 
& beief identification cf cach reoyaltiyebearing unit or process, (ii) 
Lhe total amount of royalties, and (iii) the percentage rate or dollars 
and centa anount of reyalties en each such unit cr preesss: PRCVETE™ 
that if tue royalties cannet be computed in terms cf units cr adcdlars 
age cenis value, then other data shoving the Manner in which the Con-. 
tractor computes tae royalties. 


(bp) In Mew of furnishing a report under paragraph (4), the den- 
tractor may furnish a single, eonsolidated report for each accounting 
periud of the Contracter during waich the Ccntracter has ecntracta with 
she Government, provided tke Centractor hus requcsted ard obteined the 
eeicor written aporoval of the Coutrectang Cfiieer. Such consclidated 
=~ ORY Mali be furnished, when the furnishing thereef has beex approved, 
14 the wane as approved, as soca es practicable after the 
clase ef the accounting period covered by the repert. Such conse lidatea 
report suali be maée in accordance with Contractor's established acceunt. 
sag bo oac.lee, and shall include, fox the accoumsing period, the total 
mous. Of royalties accruing te each licensor at a rate in excess of 
84,000 per amvun un the Contrecterts over-all business, togethers with 
(i} the name and address ef cach such licensor, (ii) the patent rouherr 
patent spplicscion serial mumbers (with filing dates), cr ether es 
Pacation cf the bagia fer such royaltics, (itt) a brief deseripticn of 
the suo ject matter of the License wider which royalties are charged, 

( iv} the percentage vete tr unit amount, cr if the reyelties do net 
socruc by rate or unit amount, such sther @ata ehoviag the manner by 
whlch tac royalties accrue te Licenscy, and (v) an estimate cr appresi~ 
vation Cwithewt detailed aceounting) of the rertion cf such revyalities 
that may be attrioutable to Goverament contracts. The Sontractor shall 
Fee eee he Sealant farnish at Government expense a more ‘ 
talled silocation cy such royalty peymenss attributable to Government 


4 


CONbTEctS » 


fe} Tu the event that the Contractor requests written approval to 
furnish conselideted reperts under paragragh (b} above, the Contracting 
Officer skall rromptly considers the vequesy and fouraish to the Centrac- 
tor A letter stating whether*nr oct the request is appreved and, nese 
Wishstancing any such apprival, the Contracting f£ficer shall have the 
right to questicn any suca subsequentiy furnishert report as ta accurecy 
ar completeness cf data and to ask for additional internmetios The ; 

betes ie cag ies vrmetion. ‘ 
Contractor shall furnish a copy of such letter ex appreval to the Cen- 
tractinyg CPficer administering this coviraci, 

+ 
Fe (cet. 8, 1955) 
Price Rev. A5 = 


Approved For Release 1999/09/08 : CIA-RDP81B00879R000500020015-3 


* 


i 


bd daa i Pee Da et ; a re rr ee pean a ee cr : : be i Pe? 


a 
. 


., '” - Approved For Relligibe 1999/09/08 : CIA-RDP81B006#9R000500020015-3 


w (a) After payment of eighty percent (80%) of the amount of this 
contract, as from time to time amended, further payment shall be with- 

held until a reserve of either (i) ten percent (10%) of such amount cr 
AAD? $5,000, which ever is less, shall have been set aside, such reserve 
or the balance thereof to be retained until the Contracter shall have 
Turnished to the Contracting Officer the report called for by paragraph 
(a) hereof or the copy ef the letter approving the Contractor's request 
to furnish the report under paragraph (b); PROVIDED that no amcunt shall 
continue to be withheld from payment for the causes specified in this 
Peragraph (d) if the Contracting Officer shall find that the Contractor 

- fas aot been furnished a letter as required by paragraph (c) within a 
teesonable time after making written request to submit a single, ccn- 
solidated report under the provisions of paragraph (b) of this clause; 
end. PROVIDED FURTHER that the Contracting Gfficer may, in his discre- 
‘ion, order payment to be withheld in the amcunt and manner above pro- 
vided if the report called for by paragraph (a) is unsatisfactory or (b) 
ds dGonbutchas not. been received, or if received, is found to be unsat- 
isfactory. No amount shall be withheld under this paragraph,when the 
minimum amou t specified by this paragraph is being withheld under cther 
Provisions of this erontract fhe withholding of any amcunt or subsequent 
payment thereof to the Contractor shall not be coustrued as a waiver of = 
poy right accruing to the Government under this contract. ma 


25. FILING OF PATENT APPLICATIONS rE 


: (a) Before filing or causing to be filed a patent application dis- 
Closing any subject matter of this contract, which subject matter is 
Classified "Secret" or higher, the Contractor shall, citing the thirty 
(30) day provision below, transmit the proposed application to the Con- 
tract ing Officer for determination whether, for reasons of national 
security, such application should be placed under an order of secrecy 
or sealed. in accordance with the provisions of 35 U. 5, Code 181-188 

or the issuance of a patent should be otherwise delayed under pertinent 
statutes or regulations; and the Contractor shall cbserve any instruc- 
tious of the Contracting Officer with respect to the manner of delivery 
of the patent application to the U. S. Patent Office for filing, but 

the Contractor shall not be denied the right to file such patent appli- 
Cation, If the Contracting Officer shall not have given any such in- 
gtructions within thirty (30) days from the date of mailing or other 
transmittal of the proposed application, the Contractor may file the 
application, fl 


(b) the Contractor shall furnish to the Contracting Officer, at 

the time of or prior to the time whon the Contractor files or causes = 

bo be filed a patent application disclosing any subject matter of this 

contract, which subject matter is classified "Confidential," a copy of 

guch application for determination whether, for reasons of national 

securlty, such application should he placed under an order of secrecy 

or the issuance of a patent should be otherwise delayed under pertinent 

statutes or regulations. 

I 

ime: 


FP (Oct. 8, 1956) a 
Price Rev. - 


16 - 
Approved For Release 1999/09/08 : CIA-RDP81B00879R000500020015-3 


te 


r | Po 
‘- | Approved For Relggbe 1999/09/08 : CIA-RDP81B06@H9R000500020015-3 | 


Ww Z (c) In filing any patert application coming within the scope cf 
this clause, the Contractor shall observe all applicable sesurity regu- 
aaue cae covering the transmission of classified ‘subject matter 


26. AUTHORIZATION AND CONSENT th 
| 
_,__ me following clause shali be applicable in all contracts fer sup- 
ese (including construction work), except purchase orders of $5,000 
i OSs i - : an 
_— i 


__ the Government hereby gives its euthorization and consent (withcut 
prejudice to its rights of indemification, if such rights are provided 
“for in this contract) for all use end manufacture, in the performwe of 
this contract or any part hereof or any amerndsent hereto or any suecen- 

tract hereunder (including any lower-tier subcontract), of any patented 
invention (i) embodicd in the structure or composition of any article 

the delivery of which is accepted by the Government under this ecntract, 

or (4i) utilizea in the machinery, tools, or methcds the use of which 

necessarily results from compliance by the Contractor or the using sub- 
contractor with (a) specifications ar written previsicns now or hereatter 
forming a part of this contract, or (b) specific written instructions 

Bayen by the Contracting Officer directing the manner cf porfermance. 

Tre tersractor's entire liability to the Government for patent infringe- 
tment shill be determined solely by the provisions ef the indemnity clause, 
if any, included in the contract and the Government asswses liability for 

611 other infringement to the extert of the authorization and consent 

hereinabove granted. . 


t 


27 PATENL RIGHTS : a 


(a) As used in this clause, the following terms shail have the 
meanings set forth below: 


(i) ‘he term "Subjeet Inventicn" means any inverticn, improve- 
ment or discovery (whether or not patentable) conecived er first actually 
reduced to practice either (A) in the performance of the experimertal, 
developmental, or research work called for or required under this ecn~ 
tract, or {B) in the perfornance of suy experimental, developmental, or 

research work relating to the sub‘eet matter of this contract which was 
. done upon an urderstanding in writing that a contract would be awarded; 
* PROVIDED thet the term “Suljeet Invertion" shall not inelude any inven- 
jon Wiieh is specifically identified and listed in the Schedule for the 
purpose of exclbiding ib from the license granted by this clause. 
J ‘ ri 
(ii) The term "focunical Personnel" means any persen employed 7 
iby or working under ecombract with the Contractor (ether than a subecon 
tractor whoso responsibilivies with respect to rights accruing te the 
Government in inventions avising under subcontracts ere set forth in 
paragraphs (g), (h), and (i) of this clause) who, by reagen of the ¢ 
nature of his duties in connection with the performance of this con- 
Ww) (tract, would reasonably be expected te make invertions. 


FP (Oet.8, 1956) 
Ps 6roved For Release 1999/09/08+"CtA-RDP81 B00879R000500020015-3 


(111) The terms "subcontract" and "subcontractor" mean any 
subcontract or subcontractor of the Contractor, and any lower-tier sub- 
contract or aera eo tes mesa Ges contract. | . tr Catt Lea 
(o) (1) The Contractor agrees. to and does hereby grant to the Govern- 

ment an irrevocable, nonexclusive, nontransferable, and royalty-free 

license to Practice, and cause to be practiced by or for the United 
. States Government throughout the world, each Sub ject Invention in the 

hanufacture, use and disposition according to law, of any article or 

material, and in the use of any method No license granted herein shall 

colvey any right to the Government to manufacture, have manufactured, or 

use any Subject Invention for the purpose of providing services or sup- 

plies to the general public in competition with the Contractor or the 

Contractor's commercial licensceg in the ligenssd fields. Tits or 


(2) With respect to: ae 
i) any Subject Invention made by cther than Technical Per- 
sonnel ; we a 
(11) any Subject Invention conceived prior to, but first 
actually reduced to practice in the course of, any of the experimental, 
developmental, or research work specified in (a)(i) above: ana 
(iii) the practice of any Subject Invention in foreign 
countries; the obligation of the Contractor to grant a license as pro- 
yided in (b)(1) above, to convey title as provided in (d4)(ii)(B) or (a) 
iv) below, and to convey foreign rights as previded in Ce) below, shall 
be limited to the extent of the Contractor's right to grant the same 
without incurring any obligation to pay royalties cr ether compensation 
to others solely on account of said grant. Nothing contained in this 
Patent Rights clauge shall be deemed to grant any license under any in- 
vention other than, a Subject Invention. pi 


(c) The Contractor shall. furnish to the Contracting Officer the 
following information and reports concerning Subject Inventicns which 
reasonably appear to be patentable: on 


(iL) a written disclosure promptly after conception er first 

agtual reduction to practice of each such Invention together with a 
written statement specifying whether or not a United States patent appli- 
cation claiming the Invention has been or will be filed by or on behalf 
of the Centractor; 

(44) interim reports, at least every twelve mcnths, commen-~ 
cing with the date of this contract, each listing all such Inventions 
‘conceived or first actually reduced to practice more than three menths 
prior to the date of the report, and not listed on a prior interim re- 
port, or certifying that there are no such unreported Inventiens; and 

iii) prior to final settlement of this contract, a final 
report listing all such Inventions including all those previeusly listed 
in interim reports. 


tl 


| 


(a) In connection with each Subject Inventicn referred to in 
(c)(1) above, the Contractor shall do the following: “rT 


FP (Oct. 8, 1956) ae 
ne icq BBFoved For Release 1999/09/085: CIA-RDP81 B00879R000500020015-3 


f eee : el canes eer a: : : 4 ie do 2 ieee = i peg 
4 a ! : 


‘Approved For Reégfise 1999/09/08 : CIA-RDP81Bobg#9R000500020015-3 


(i) if the Contractor specifies that a United States 
Patent application claiming such Invention will be filed, the Con- 
tractor shall file or cause to be filed such application in due 
form and time; however, if the Contractor, after having specified 
that such an application would be filed, decides not to file or cause 
to be filed said application, the Contractor shall so notify the Con- 
tracting Officer at the carliest practicable date and in any event 
a later than eight months after first publication, public use or 
Bale. 

: (ii) if the Contractor specifies that a United States 
patent application claiming such Invention has not been filed and will 
not be filed (or having specified that such an application will be 
filed thereafter notifies the Contracting Officer to the ecntrary), the 
Contractor shall: 

(A) inform the Contracting Officer in writing at the 
earliest practicable date of any publication of such Invention made by 
or known to the Contractor or, where applicable, of any contemplated 
publication by the Contractor, stating the date and identity of such 
publication or contemplated publication; and 

B) convey to the Government the Contractor's entire 
right, title, and interest in such Invention by delivering to the Con- 
tracting Officer upon written request such duly executed instruments 
(prepared by the Government) of assignment and application, and such 
other papers as are deemed necessary to vest in the Government the 
Contractor's right, title, and interest aforesaid, and the right to 
apply for and prosecute patent applications covering such Invention 
throughout the world, subject, however, to the right of the Contrac- 
tor specified in (e) below to file foreign applicaticns, and subject 
further to the reservation of a non-exclusive and royalty-free license 
to the Contractor (and to its existing and future associated and affi- 
listed companies, if any, within the corporate structure of which the 
Contractor is a part) which license shall be assignable to the succes- 
bor of that part of the Contractor's business to which such Inventica 
pertains: 

(iii) the Contractor shall furnish promptly to the Con- 
tracting Officer on request an irrevocable power of attorney to in- 
spect and make copies of cach United States patent application filed 
by or on behalf of the Contractor covering any such Invention; 

(iv) In the event the Contractor, or those other than the 
Government deriving rights from the Contractor, elects not te continue 
prosecution of any such United States patent application filed by cr 
on behalf of the Contractor, the Contractor shall so notify the Con- 
tracting Officer not less than sixty days before the expiration of 
the response period and, upon written request, deliver to the Contrac- 
Wing Officer such duly executed instruments (prepared by the Government ) 
as are deemed necessary to vest in the Government the Contractor's 
entire right, title, and interest in such Invention and the applica- 
Qlon, subject to the reservation as specified in (a)(ai) above; and 
(v) the Contractor shall deliver to the Contracting Officer 
duly executed instruments fully confirmatory of any liceuse rights 
herein agreed to be granted to the Goverument,. 


EP (Oct. 8, 1956) 


PriApproved For Release 1999/0982 GIA-RDP81B00879R000500020015-3 


ee PRED Pp st 2 2 DPE ew py po TEE 


La _ | a es ae pore t 
' Approved For Religie 1999/09/08 : CIA-RDP81B00%gR000500020015-3 


i 
= 


(e) The Contractor, or those other than the Government deriving cs 
rights from the Contractor, shall have the exclusive rights to file 

applications on Subject Inventions in each foreign country within: 

i) nine months from the date a corresponding United States 
‘Gpplication is filed; 

. ii) six months from the date permission is granted to file 
-Torcign applications where such filing had been prohibited for security 
reasons; or 

: edo (iii) such longer period as may be approved by the Contrac- 
‘ting Officer. The Contractor shall, upon written request of the Con- 
‘tracting Officer, convey to the Government the Contractor's entire 
‘right, title, and interest in each Subject Invention in each foreign 
‘country in which an application has not been filed within the time - 
above specified, subject to the reservation of a non-exclusive and = 
‘royalty-free license to the Contractor together with the right of the 
Contractor to grant sublicenses, which license and right shall be as- 
signable to the successor of that part of the Contractor’s business to 
Which the Subject Invention pertains. 


(2) If the Contractor fuils to deliver to the Contracting 3fficer 
the Interim reports required by (c)(ii) above, or fails to furnish the 
written disclosures for all Subject Inventions required by (e)(i) above 
Shown to be due in accordance with any interim report delivered under 
(c)(43) or otherwise known to be unreported, there shall be withheld 
from payment until the Contractor shall have corrected such failures 
elther ten percent (10%) of the amount cf this contract, as from time 
to time amended, or five thousand dollars ($5,000), whichever is less. 
After puyment of eighty percent (80%) of the amount of this eentract, 
Bs from time to time amended, payment shall be withheld until a reserve 
of elther ten percent (10% ) of such amount, or five thousand dollars 
($5,000), whichever is less, shall have been set aside, such reserve 
or balance thereof to be retained until the Contractor shall have fur- 
nished to the Contracting Officer: : ra 


pi) the final report required by (c)(iii) above; 
ii) written disclosures for all Subject Inventions required 
by (c)(i)abeve which are show to be due in accordance with interim re- 
ports delivered under (c)(ii) above or in accordance with such final a 
reports or are otherwise known to be unreported; and 
i iii) the information as to any subcontractor required by (h) 
below. The maximum amount which may be withheld under this paragraph 
(£) shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of the amount of this contract 
or five thousand dollars ¢45 000), whichever is less, and no amount 
ehall be withheld under this paragraph (f} when the amount specified 
y this paragraph (f) is being withheld under other provisions of this 
eontract, The withholding of any amount or subsequent payment thereof 
to the Contractor shall not be construed as a waiver of any rights ac- 
cruing to the Government under this contract. This paragraph (f) shall 
not be construed as requiring the Contractor to withhold any amounts 
from a subcontractor to enforce compliance with the patent provisions 
of a subcontract. | 


FP (Cet. 8, 1956) oe 
Erigp proved For Release 1999/09/08 : -CIA-RDP81B00879R000500020015-3 ; 


Bone 


* 


Approved For Reiditee 1999/09/08 : CIA-RDP81B00404R000500020015-3 


/  (g) The Contractor shall exert all reasonable effort in negotia- 
ting for the inclusion of this Patent Rights clause in any subcontract 
hereunder of three thousand dollars ($3,000) or more having experimen- 
_ tal, developmental, or research work as one of its purposes. In the 
, event of refusal by a suscontractor to accept the Patent Rights clause, 
| the Contractor shall not proceed with the subcontract without written 
authorization of the Contracting Officer, and upon obtaining such auth- 
orization, shall cooperate with the Government in the negotiation with 
such subcontractor of an acceptable patent rights clause: PROVIDED, 
however, that the Contractor shall in any event require the subcontrac- 
tor to grant to the Government patent rights under Subject Inventions 
_ of no legs scope and on no less favorable terms than those which. the 
Contractor has under such subcoitracts, except that in no event shall 
‘the subcontractor be required to grant to the Government patent rights 
_ din excess of those herein agreed to be granted to the Government by the 
Contractor. : 


(h) The Contractor shall, at the earliest practicable date, notify 
the Contracting Officer in writing of any subcontract containing a patent 
rights clause, furnish the Contracting Offiecr a copy of such clause, and 
notify the Contracting Officer when such subcontract is completed. It is 
understood that with respect to such subcontract clause, the Government 

ea trird party beneficiary, and the Contractor hereby assigns to the 
Governncnt all the rights that the Contractor would have to enforce the 
subcontractor's obligations for the benefit of the Government with res- 
pect to Subject Inventions. The Contractor shall not be obligated to 
enfors2 the agreements of any subcontractor hereunder relating to Subject 
Inventions. 


(i) When the Contractor shows that it has been delayed in the 
‘performance of this contract by reason of its inability to obtain in ac- 
/cordance with (g) above a suitable patent rights clause from a qualified 
, Subcontractor for any item or service required under this contract for 
‘which the Contractor itself does not have available facilitics or quali- 
‘fied personnel, the Contractor's delivery dates shall be extended for a 
period of time equal to the duration of such delay; and, upon request 
of the Contractor, the Contracting Officer shall determine to what ex- 
tent, if any, an additional extension of the delivery dates and an in- 
-erease in contract prices based upou additional costs incurred by such 
delay are proper under the circumstances; and the contract shall be 
modificd accordingly. If the Contractor, after exerting all reasonable 
-effort, is unable to obtain a qualificd subcontractor as set forth above, 
ithe Contractor may subuit to the Contracting Officer a written request 
for waiver or modification of the requirement that a suitable patent 
‘vights clause be included in the subcontract. 


Such request shall specifically state that the Contractor has used 
all reasonable effort to obtain such qualified subcontractor, and shall 
(elite the waiver or termination provision hereinafter set forth. If, 
within thirty-five (35) days after the date of receipt of such reguest 


FP (Oct. 8, 1956) 
‘Price Rev. ~ 21 - 


Approved For Release 1999/09/08 : CIA-RDP81B00879R000500020015-3 


afb ws ( et pts 7 * a © fre bob eed PL bie 
! : : H i t it i 


iL 


\ 
‘ 


for a walvg or modification of said requirement, the Contracting Offi- 
¢cr Bholl fail to deny in writing such request, the requirement shall 
be deened to have been waived by the Government. If within such period 
the Contractor shall receive a written denial of such request by the 
Contracting Officer, this contract shall thereupon automatically ter- 
minate and the rights and obligations of the parties shall be governed 
_ by the provisions of the clause of this contract providing foe termina- 
tion for the convenience of the Government, 


28, COPYRIGHT 


(a) The Contractor agrees to and does hereby grant to the Govern- 
ment, and to its officers, agents and employces acting within the scope 
of their official duties, ( (5 a royalty-free, nonexclusive and irrevo- 
' Gable license to reproducc, translate, publish, use, and dispose of, 
and to authorize others so to do, all copyrightable material first pro- 
- @uced or composed and delivered to the Government under this contract 

by the Contractor, its employees or any individual or concern specifi- 
 @ally employed or assigned to originate and’ prepare such materia} and 
(41) a license as aforesaid under any and all copyrightcd or copyright- 
able work not first produced or composed by the Contractor in the per- 
formance of this contract but which is incorporated in the material fur- 
nished under the contract, provided that such license shall be only to 
the extent the Contractor now has, or prior to completion or final set- 
tlement of the contract may acquire, the right to grant such license 
without becoming liable to pay compensation to others solely because 
of such grant. 


(vo) The Contractor agrees that it will exert all reasonable cffort 
to advise the Contracting Officer, at the time of delivering any copy- 
rightable or copyrighted work furnished under this contract, of any 
adversely held copyrighted or copyrightable material ineorporated in 
any such work and of any invasion of the right of privacy therein con- 
tained. 


(ec ) The Conerae ter agrees to report to the Contracting Officer, 
promptly and in reasonable written detail, any notice or claim of copy- 
right infringement received by the Contactor with respect to any mater- 
ial delivered under this. contract. 


29. REPRODUCTION AND USE OF TECHNICAL DATA 


The Contractor agrecs to and does hereby grant to the Government, 
. to the full extent ef the Contractor's right to do so without paynent 
of compensation to others, the right to reproduce, usc, and disclose 
for governmental purposes (including the right to give to foreign gov- 
ermments for their use as the national inte rest of the United States 
may demand) 211 er any part of the reports, drawings, biuepriuts , data, 
and technical information specificd to be delivered by the Contractor 
to the Government under this contract; PROVIDED, however, that nothing 


SP (Oct. 8, 1956) 


Price Rev. 


pPPrON For Release 1999/09/08 *ClA- RDP81B00879R000500020015-3 


Approved For Reltgbe 1999/09/08 : CIA-RDP81B00@g9R000500020015-3 


It 


| 0 o Se mews 


ee fae Bo a if Pee EL bb Bp to Pea i 
; 2 : . : a i: oe 
a 
i 


contained in this paragraph shall be deemed, directly or by implication, 
to grant any liccuse under any patent now or hereartor issued or to 
grant any right to reproduce anything else called for by this coatract. 


. 30. GOVERNMENT-FURNISHED PROPERTY 


(a) ‘he Goverament shall deliver to the Contractor, for use in 
connection with and under the terms of this contract, the property des- 
erlbed in the Schedule or specifications, together with such related 
Gata acd information as the Contractor may request and as may reason- 
‘ably be required for the intended use of such property (hereinafter 
_veferred to as "Government-furnished Property"). The delivery or per- 
formance dates for the supplies or services to be furnished by the Con- 
tractor under this contract are based upon the expectation that Govern- 
ment-furnished Property suitable for use will be delivered to the Con- 
:tractor at the times stated in the Schedule or, if not so stated, in 
‘sufficient time to enable the Contractor to meet such delivery or per- 
formance dates. In the event that Governnent-furnished Property is not 
Gclivered to the Contractor by such time or times, the Contracting Offi- 
cer shall, upon timcly written request made by the Contractor, make a 
\determination of the delay occasioned the Contractor thereby, and shall 
equitably adjust the delivery or performance dates or the contract price, 
or both, ané any other contractual provision affected by such delay, in 
accordance with the procedures provided for in the clause of this con- 
tract entitled "Changes." In the event the Government-furnished Property 
-is received by the Contractor in a condition not suitable for the in- 
tended use the Contractor shall, upon receipt thereof, notify the Con- 
drach ie Officer of such fact and, as directed by the Contracting Offi- 
eer, either (i) return such property at the Governnent's expense or 
otherwise dispose of the property oe effeet repairs or modifica- 
tions. Upon the completion of (i ee ii) above, the Contracting Officer 
‘upon written request of the eee ae shall equitably adjust the delivery 
or performance dates or the contract price, or both, and any other con- 
tractual provision affeeted by the rejection or disposition, or the re- 
pair or modification, in accordanee with the proeedures provided for in 
‘the clause of this contract entitled "Changes." The foregoing provisions 
;for adjustment are exclusive and the Gey rani shall aot "Ge isos to 
-eult for breach of contract by reason of any delay in delivery of Gov- 
-ermment-furnished Property or delivery of such property in a condition 
not suitable for its intended use. 


(b) By notice in writing the Contraeting Officer may decrease the 
property furnished or to be furnished by the Government under this con- 
tract. In any such case, the Contracting Officer upon the written re- 
quest of the Contractor shall equitably adjust the delivery or per- 
formance dates or the contract price, or both, and any other contrac- 
‘tual provisions affected by the decrease, in accordance with the pro- 
‘ecdures provided for in the clause of this contract entitled "Changes 


Fe (oct.8, 1956) 
‘Price Rev. - 23- 


‘Approved For Release 1999/09/08 : CIA-RDP81B00879R000500020015-3 


(c) Title to the Goverancnt- furnished property shall remain in 
the Government. Title to Governucnt-furnished property | shall not be 
affecte od by the incorporation or attachneat thereof to any property 

“not owned by the Govermaent, nor shall such Governnont-furnished pro- 
perty, or any part thereof, be or become a fixture or lose its identity 
ag peérsonalty by reason of affixation to any realty. The Contractor 
shall maintain adequate property control records of Governnent- furnished 
property in accordance with the provisions of the "Manual for the Control 
of Government Property in the Possession of Contractors" (Appendix B, 
Armed Services Procurement Regulation) as in effect on the date of the 
contract, which Manual is hereby incorporated by reference and made a 
part of this contract. 


(4) The Governnent-furnished property shall, unless otherwise 
provided herein, be used only for the performance of this contract. 


(e)° The Contractor shall maintain and administer, in accordance 
with sound industrial practice, a program for the maintenance, repair, 
protection and preservation of Government-furnished property, until 
‘disposed of by the Contractor in accordance with this clause In the 
event that any damage occurs to Governnent-furnished Property the risk 
of which has been assumed by the Government under this contract, the 
Governneont shall replace such items or the Contractor shall rake such 
“repair of the property as the Government directs; provided, however, 
that 1f the Contractor cannot effeet such repair “within the time re- 
quired, the Contractor shall dispose of such property in the manner 
directed by the Contracting Officer. The contract price includes no 
compensation to the Contractor for the performance of any repair or 
replacenent for which the Government is responsible, and an equitable 
adjustiacnt will be made in the contract price for any such repair or 
replacement of Governnent-furnished property made at the direction of 
the Governnent. Any repair or replacenent for which the Contractor 
is responsible under the provisions of this contract shall be accom 
‘plished by the Contractor at its own expense. 


(f) (i) Exeept for loss, destruction or dammge resulting from a 
fallure of the Contractor, due to willful misconduct or lack of good 
faith of any of the Contractor's managerial personnel as defined 
herein, to maintain and administer the program for the maintenance, 
repair, protection and preservation of the Governuent- furnished pro- 
perty as required by paragraph (c) hereof, and except as specifically 
“provided in clause (s)........of this contract or in os clause or 
(clauses of this contract degignated in the Schedule, the Contractor 
‘shall not be liable for loss or destruction of or ae to the Gov- 
-ernment-furnished property (A) caused by any peril while the property 
is in transit off the Contractor's premises, or (B) caused by any of 
the following perils while the property is on the Contractor's or sub- 
contractor's premises, or on any other premises where such property 
may properly be located, or by romeval therefrom because of any of the 
‘following perils: 


FP \(octs.8, 1956) ; 
‘Price Rev. 7 ~ 2h - 


Approved For Release 1999/09/08 : CIA-RDP81B00879R000500020015-3 


- Approved For Relwllse 1999/09/08 : ClA-RDPS1BodwFeR000500020015-3 


ce ea 


(I) Fire, lightning; windstorm, cyclone, tornado, hail; explo- 
sion; riot, riot attending a strike, civil commotion; vandalism and mali- 


_elous mischief; sabotage; aircraft or objects falling therefrom; vehicles 
‘ running on land or tracks, excluding vehicles owned or operated by the 
Contractor or any agent or employee of the Contractor; smoke, sprinkler 


Leakage ; earthquake or volcanic eruption; flood, meaning thereby rising 


| of a body of water; hostile or warlike action, including action in hin- 


dering, combating, or defending against an actual, impending or expected 


_ attack by any government or sovereign power (de jure or de facto), or by 
'@hy authority using military, naval, or air forces, or by an agent of any 


such government, power, authority, or forces; or 


i 


(II) Other peril, of a type not listed above, if such other 


peril is customarily covered by insurance (or by a reserve for self- 


insurance) in accordance with the normal practice of the Contractor, or 
the prevailing practice in the industry in which the Contractor is en- 


| gaged with respect to similar property in the same general locale. 


The perils as set forth in (A) ana (B) above are hereinafter called 
“excepted perils." 


This clause shall not be construed as relieving a subcontractor from 


jabil‘ty for loss or destruction of or damage to the Government~Furnished 


property while in its possession or control, except to the extent that 
the subcontract, with the prior approval of the Contracting Officer, may 
provide for the relief of the subcontractor from such liability. In the 


absence cf such approval, the subcontract shall contain appropriate pro- 
visions requiring the return of all Government-Furnished property in as 
-good condition as when received, except for reasonable wear and tear or 
for the utilization of the property in accordance with the provisions of 
the prime contract. 


The term "Contractor's managerial personnel" as used herein means 
the Contractor's directors, officers and any of its managers, superin~ 
tendents, or other equivalent representatives who have supervision or 
direction of (I) all or substantially all of the Contractor's business ; 
(II) all or substantially all of the Contractor's operation at any one 

lant or separate location at which the contract is being performed; 


s 
Sf) a separate and complete major industrial operation in connection 


with the performance of this contract. 


(ii) The Contractor represents that it is not including in the 


‘price hereunder, and agrees that it will not hereafter include in any 


price to the Government, any charge or reserve for insurance (including 


self-insurance funds or reserves) covering loss or destruction of or 


damage to the Government-furnished property caused by any excepted 
peril. 


(83) Upon the happening of loss or destruction of or damage 
to any Government-furnished property caused by an excepted peril, the 


Contractor shall notify the Contracting Officer thereof, and shall 


FP (Oct. 8, 1956) 
= Apprdved For Release 1999/09/08 “CIA-RDP81B00879R000500020015-3 


ee tea OT 


ade Se 


: oe ! Hace ual a i teat he ag wos i es 
“Ht ' : beeen te ae : 


Approved For Refiise 1999/09/08 : CIA-RDP81B0de#9R000500020015-3 


communicate with the Loss and Salvage Organization, if any, now or here- 
after designated by the Contracting Officer, and with the assistance of 
the Loss and Salvage Organization so designated (unless the Contracting 
Officer has directed that no such organization be employed), shall take 
‘all reasonable steps to protect the Government-furnished property from 
‘further damage, separate the damaged and undamaged Government-furnished 
property, put all the Government-furnished property in the best possible 
order, and furnish to the Contracting Officer a statement of: (A) the 
lost, destroyed and damaged Government-furnished property (B) the time 
‘and origin of the loss, destruction or damage, (C) all known interests 
in commingled property of which the Government-furnished property is a 
part, and (D) the insurance, if any, covering any part of or interest 

in such commingled property. The Contractor shall be reimbursed for 
‘the expenditures made by it in performing its obligations under this sub- 
‘paragraph (444 )(including charges made to the Contractor by the Loss and 
‘Salvage Organization, except any of such charges the payment of which 
the Government has, at its option, assumed directly), to the extent ap- 
proved by the Contracting Officer and set forth in a Supplemental Agrec- 
ment. 


(iv) With the approval of the Contracting Officer after loss 

_ or destruction of or damage to Government-furnished property, and sub- 
‘Jeet to such conditions and limitations as may be imposed by the Con- 
-tracting Officer, the Contractor may, in order to minimize the loss to 
‘the Government or in order to pormit resumption of business or the like, 
sell for the account of the Government any item of Government-furnished 
property which has been damaged beyond practicable repair, or which is 
so comaingled or combined with property of others, including the Con- 
tractor, that separation is impracticable. 


(v) Exeept to the extent of any loss or destruction of or 
damage to Government-furnished property for which the Contractor is re- 
“lieved of liability under the foregoing provisions of this clause, and 
except for reasonable wear and tear or depreciation, or the utilization 
of the Government-furnished property in accordance with the provisions 
of this contract, the Government-furnished property (other than property 
permitted to be sold) shall be xveturned to the Government in as good 
condition as when received by the Contractor in connection with this 
contract, or as repaired under paragraph (e) above. , 


(vi) In the event the Contractor is reinburscd or compensated 
for any loss or destruction of or damage to the Government-~furnished 
property, caused by an excepted peril, it shall equitably reimburse the 

Government. The Contractor shall do nothing to prejudice the Government's 

‘rights to recover against third parties for any such loss, destruction or 

‘damage and, upon the request of the Contracting Officer, shali”at the 

‘Government's expense, furnish to the Government all reasonable assistance 
and ccoperation (ineluding the prosecution of suit and the execution of 
dustruments of assignment in favor of the Government) in obtaining re- 

covery. In addition, where a subcontractor has not been relieved from 

liability for any loss or destruction of or damage to the Government- 


TAASaved For Release 1999/09/08;-CIA-RDP81B00879R000500020015-3 - 


VV 


, He fog ee eee ee 


tos 


Furnished property, the Contractor shall enforce the liability of the 
subcontractor for such loss or destruction of or damage to the Govern- 
ment-Furnished property for the benefit of the Government. 


(vii )(Where applicable). In the event any aircraft are to be 
furnished under this contract, any loss or destruction of, or damage to, 
such aircraft or other Government-furnished property occurring in con- 
nection with operations of said aireraft will be governed by the clause 
of this contract captioned "Flight Risks", to the extent such clause is, 
by its terms, applicable, 


(g) The Government shall at all reasonable times have access to 
the premises wherein any Government-furnishea property is located. 


(n) Upon the completion of this contract, or at such carlicr date 
as may be fixed by the Contracting Officer, the Contractor shall submit, 
in a form acceptable to the Contracting Officer, inventory schedules 
covering all items of Government-furnished property not consumed in the 
performance of this contract (ineluding any resulting scrap), or not 
theretofore delivered to the Government, and shall deliver or make such 
other disposal of such Government-furnished property, as may ba directed 
or authorized by the Contracting Officer. Recoverable scrap from Gov- 
ermucnt~furt.ished property shall be reported in accordance with a pro- 
‘cedure and in such form as the Contracting Officer may direct. The net 
proceeds of any such disposal shall be credited to the contract price or 


shall be paid in such other manner as the Contracting Officer may direct. 


(1) Directions of the Contracting Officer and communications of 
the Contractor shall be in writing. ’ 


31. TERMINATION FOR CONVENIENCE OF THE GOVERNMENT 


(a) The performauce of work under this contract may be terminated 
by the Government in accordance with this clause in whole, or from tine 
to time iu part, whenever the Contracting Officer shall determine that 
such termination is in the best interest of the Government. Any such 
termination shall be effected by delivery to the Contractor of a Notice 
of Termination specifying the extent to which performance of work under 
the contract is terminated, and the date upon which such termination be- 
comes effective 


(o) After receipt of a Notice of Termination, and except as other- 
wise directed by the Contracting Officer, the Contractor shall (1) stop 
work under the contract on the date and to the extent specificd in the 
Notice of Termination; (2) place no further orders or subcontracts for 
materials, services, or facilities except as my be necessary for con~ 
pletion of such portion of the work under the contract as is not ter- 
ninated; (3) terninate all orders and subcontracts to the extent that 
they relate to the performance of work terminated by the Notice of Ter- 
mination; (4) assign to the Government, in the manner, at the times, and 
to the extent directed by the Contracting Officer, all of the right, 


aye 8 


"Approved For Relfag&e 1999/09/08 : CIA-RDP81B00J9R000500020015-3 


DEOved For Release 1999/09/08 s(CIA-RDP81B00879R000500020015-3 


& 


4 
i 


hitle, and interest of the Contractor under the orders and subcontracts 
60 terminated, in which case the Government shall have the right, in its 
discretion, to settle or pay any or all claims arising out of the termina~ 
tion of such orders and subcontracts; (5) settle all outstanding liabi- 
litics and all claims arising out of such termination of orders and sub- 
contracts, with the approval or ratification of the Contracting Officer, 
to the extent he may require, which approval or ratification shall be 
final for all the purposes of this clause; (6) transfer title and deliver 
to the Government, in the manner, at the tines, and to the extent, if any, 
directed by the Contracting Officer, (1) the fabricated or unfabricated 
parte, work in process, completcd work, supplies, and other material pro- 
duced as a part of, or acquired in connection with the performance of, 
the work terminated by the Notice of Termination, and (ii) the completed 
or partially completed plans, drawings, information, and other property 
which, if the contract had been completed, would have been required to 

be furnished to the Goverment, (7) use its best efforts to sell, in the 
manner, at the times, to the extent, and at the price or prices directed 
or authorized by the Contracting Officer, any property of the types re- 
ferred to in provision (6) of this paragraph, PROVIDED, HOWEVER, that the 
Contractor (i) shall not be required to extend credit to any purchaser, 
and (ii) may acquire any such property under the conditions prescribed 
by and at a price or prices approved by the Contracting Officer; and 
PROVIDED further that the proceeds of any such transfer or disposition 
sholl be applica in reduction of any payments to be made by the Govern- 
ment to the Contractor under this Contract or shall otherwise be credited 
to the price or cost of the work covered by this contract or paid in such 
other manner as the Contracting Officer mav direct; (8) complete perfor- 
mance cf such part of the work as shall not have been terminated by the 
Notice af Termination; and (9) take such action as may be necessary, or 
as the Contracting Officer may direct, for the proteetion and preserva- 
ipa of the property related to this contrat which is in the possession 
of the Contractor and in which the Government has or may acquire an 
interest. At any tine after expiration of the plant clearance period, as 
defined. in Section VIII, Armed Services Procurement Regulation, as it nay 
be, anended fron tine. gee ae the Contractor may subnit to the Contrac- 
ting Officer a list, certified as to guantity and quality, of any or all 
itens of termination inventory not previously disposed of, exclusive of 
ttgus the disposition of which has been direeted or authorized py the 
Contracting Officer, and may requcst the Govermicnt to remove such itcns 
or onter into a storage agreement covering then. Not later than fifteen 
(15) days thereafter, the Government will accept title to such items and 
retiove then or enter into a storage agreement covering the same, PROVIDED 
that the list subnitted shall be subject to verification by the Coutrac- 
ting Officer upon removal of the items, or if the items are stored, within 
forby-five (45) days from the date of submission of the list, and any 
necgssary adjustment to correct the list as submitted shail be mace prior 
to final setblenent. ae _ ra ar yae 


Ce) | “After receipt of a Notice of Termination, the Contractor shall 
submit to the Contracting Officer its termination claim, in the form aad 


FP (Oct. 8, 1956) 
apeG: Rev. - 28 - 


Approved For Release 1999/09/08 : CIA-RDP81 B00879R000500020015-3 


.°_ Approved For Release 1999/09/08 : a ‘ 


! a 2 : ae qa 
i | t ie 


Approved For Relfife 1999/09/08 : CIA-RDP81B008#8R000500020015-3 


with the certification prescribed by the Contracting Officer. Such clain 
shall be subiitted promptly but in no event later than two years fron 

the effective date of termination, unless one or more extensions in writ- 
ing. are granted by the Contracting Officer, wpon request of the Contrace 
tor made in writing within such two-year period or authorized extension 
thereof. However, if the Contracting Officer determines that the facts 
justify such action, he may reecive and act upon any such termination 
elain at ony time after such two-year period or any extension thereof. 
Upon failure of the Contractor to subuit its termination elain within 
the tine allowed, the Contracting Officer may determine, on the basis of 
infomation available to hin, the amount, if any, due to the Contractor 
by reason of the termination and shall thereupon pay to the Contractor the 
anount so determined, 


(a) Subject to the provisions of paragraph (c), the Contractor and 
the Contracting Officer nay agrce upon the whole or any part of the 
amount or aiounts to be paid to the Contractor by reason of the total 
or partial termination of work pursuant to this clause, which amount 
or amounts nay include a reasonable allowance for vrorit on work done. 
The contract shall be amended accordingly, and the Contractor shall be 
poid the agreed amount. Nothing in paragraph (c) of this clausc, pres- 
eribing the amount to be paid to the Contractor in the event of failure 
of the Contractor and the Contracting Officer to agree upon the whole 
aroun. to be paid to the Contractor by reason of the termination of work 
pursuant to this clause, shall be deemed to linit, restrict, or otherwise: 
determine or affect the amount or amounts which may be agreed upon to be 
paid to the Contractor pursuant to this paragraph (a). 


(e) In the event of the failure of the Contractor and the Contrac- 
ting “officer to agree as provided in paragraph (ad) upon the whole amount 
to be paid to the Contractor by reason of the terzination of work pursuant 
to this clause, the Contracting Officer shall determine, on the basis of 
information available to hin, the anount, if any, due to the Contractor 
by reason of the termination and shall pay to the Contractor the amounts 
deternined as follows: 


(1) For completed supplies aceepted by the Government (or sold 
or acquired os provided in paragraph (b)(7) above) and not theretofore 
_ paid for, a sum equivalent to the aggregate price for such supplics con- 
puted in accordance with the price or prices specified in the contract, 
appropriately adjusted for any saving of freight or other charges: 


(2) The total of -- 


(1) The costs incurred in the performance of the work termina- 
' ted, including initial costs and preparatory expense allocable thereto, 

but exclusive of any costs attributable to supplics paid or to be paid 
for under paragraph (c)(1) hereof ; 


. FP (Oct. 8, 1956) 
Price Rev. - 29 - 


mee ae 


Approved For Release 1999/09/08 : CIA-RDP81B00879R000500020015-3 


— 
arene 
net nats 


es eee TS 
ee 
Senge ee 


Approved For Release 1999/09/08 : CIA-RDP81B00879R000500020015-3 


{ii) The cost of settling and paying claims arising cut 
of the termination of work under subcoatracts ox orders, aa provided 
in paragraph (b){5) above, which are properly chargeable to the 
terminated portion of the contract {exclusive of amounts paid or 
payable on account of supplies or materials delivered or services 
furnished by subcontractors or vendors prior to the effective date 
of the Notice of Termination, which amounts shall be includeé in 
the costs payable under (1) shove). 


(441) A eum equal to 2% of that part of the amount deter- 
mined under (i) which representa the cost of articles and meterials 
net processed by the Contractor, plus « sum equal to & of the re- 
mainder of such smcunt, but the aggregate of such eums shall not 
exceed 6% of the whole of the amount determined under subdivision 
{4} above, which amount for the purpose of this subdivision (114) 
shall exclude any charges for interest on borrowings; PROVIDED, 
HOWEVER, that if it appeara that the Contractor would have sustained 
@ joss on the entire contract had it been completed, no profit shall 
be included or allowed under this subdivision (111) and@ an appropriate 
adjustment shall be mefte reducing the amount of the settlement to 
reflect the indicated rate of loss. 


(3) The reasonable costa of settlement, including accounting, 
legel, clerical, and other expenses reasonably necessary for the pre- 
paration of settlement claime and supporting date with respect to the 
terminated portion of the contrect and for the termination and settic- 
ment of subcontracts thereunder, together with reasonable atorage, 
transportation, and other costs incurred in connection with the pro- 
tection or disposition of property allocable to this contract. 


The total sum to be paid to the Contractor under (2) end (2) of 
thie paragraph (e) shall not exeed the total contract price as re- 
@uced by the amount of payments otherwise made and as further reduced 
by the contract price of work not terminated. Except for normal spoll- 
age, and except to the extent that the Government shall have otherwise 
expressly assumed the risk of loss, there shall be excluded from the 
emounte peyenis to the Contractor as provided in paragraph (¢)(1) end 
paragraph (e)(2)(1), the fair value, as determined by the Contracting 
Officer, of property which is destroyed, lost, stalen, or damaged so 
as to become undeliverable to the Government, or to a buyer pureuant 
to paragraph {b)(7). 


(f} Any determination of costs under paragraph (c)} or (¢) hereof 
shall be governed by the Statement of Principles for Consideration of 
Costa set forth in Part 4 of Section VIII of the Armed Services Procure-~ 
ment Reguintiona, as in effect ou the date of thie soutract. 


~ J0- 
FP (oct.8, 1956) 
Price Rev, 


Approved For Release 1999/09/08 : CIA-RDP81B00879R000500020015-3 


Approved For Release 1999/09/08 : CIA-RDP81B00879R000500020015-3 


{g) The Contractor shall have the right of appeal, under the 
clause of this contract entitled “Disputes,” from any determination 
made by the Contracting Officer under paragraphs (c) or (¢) above, 
exept that if the Contractor has failed to submit ite claim within 
the time provided in paragraph («) above and has failed to request 
extension of such time, he shall have no such right of appeal. In 
any ease where the Contracting Officer has made a determination of 
the amount due under paragraph (c} or fs} above, the Government shall 
pay to the Contractor the following: (1) if there is no right of 
appeal hereunder or if no timely appeal has been taken, the amount 
so determined by the Contracting Officer, or (11) if ean appeal has 
bean taken, the amount finally determined on such appeal. 

CS eeaaeeieneneanee aeteeetimmonain dade anon tasineasanmemnntenanenaneantenhtensennsanenciataatneenaeree tree oe ae 


wher ernest ob ttm ar 
a” 


a 


eS in 


FP (oct.8, 1956) 
Price Rev. 


Approved For Release 1999/09/08 : CIA-RDP81B00879R000500020015-3 


I Sats ‘ 4 eee: eT. ' fee Pane Fa By eee ce er We 
we ae i 7 PR STES OUP a ots | 


Lae 
4 


' Approved For Retlgbe 1999/09/08 CIA-RDP81B00@#9R000500020015-3 : 


if : j 

oe (h) In arriving at the amount duc the Contractor under this clause 
‘there shall be deducted (1) all unliquidated advance or other unliquidated 
Payments on account theretofore made to the Contractor, (2) any claim 
Which the Government may have against the Contractor in connection with 
this contract, and (3) the agreed price for, or the proceeds of sale of, 
au materials, supplies, or other things acquired by the Contractor or 
BO ad, pursuant to the provisions of this clause, and not otherwise rc- 
covered by or credited to the Government. 

\ 


(8) If the termination hereunder be partial, prior to the settle- 
ae the terminated portion of this contract, the Contractor may file 
with the Contracting Officer a request in writing for an cquitable ad- 
Justmeny of the price or prices specified in the contract relating to 
the cor inued portion of the contract (the portion not terminated by 

the Notice of Termination), and such equitable adjustment as may be 
perecd pon shall be made in such price or prices. 


(3 The Government may from time to time, under such terms and con- 
Gitions as it may prescribe, make partial payments and payments on account 
ngainst ste incurred by the Contractor in connection with the terminated 
portion of this contract whenever in the opinion of the Contracting Offi- 
cer the aggregate of such payments shall be within the amount to which 
the Contractor will be entitled hereunder. If the total of such payments 
is in exeess of the amount finally agreed or determined to be due under 
this eel such oxcess shall be payable by the Contractor to the Gov- 
ernment upon demand, together with interest computed at the rate of Et, 
per annum, for the period from the date such oxcess payment is received 
a the Contractor to the date on which such excess is repaid to the Gov- 
eromcnt; provided, however, that no interest shall be charged with res- 
pet to any such excess payment attributable to a reduction in the Con- 
tractor's ¢laim by reason of retention or other disposition of termina- 
tion, inventory until ten days after the date of such retention or dis- 
position, To a _ oS 

: .. (k) Unless otherwise provided for in this contract, or by appli- 
cable statute, the Contractor, from the effective date of termination 
end for a period of six years after final settlement under this con- 
rract, shall preserve and make available to the Government at all rea- 
sonable times at the office of the Contractor but. without, direct charge 
fo, the coveranoat, ali its books, records, documents, and other evidence 
bearing on the costs and expenses of the Contractor under this, contract 
and relating to the work terminated hereunder, or, to the oxtent ap- 
prow by the Contracting Officer, photographs, micro-photographs, or 
ther authentic reproductions thereof. 


32. PAYMENTS 


ofthe Gonbractoy spol be paid, upon the submission of properly cer 
tified invoices or vouchers, the prices stipulated herein for supplies 

Geliyered, and accepted or services rendered and accepted, less deductions, 
a (Oct.8, 1956), 


Price Rev. 


7 Approved For Release 1999/09/08 : CIA-RDP81B00879R000500020015-3 a oS 


site STLHRE 1 : = 4 shat tage 3 
: j : MMM RTL rk ‘ el ee qocore 4 qt bee pone 

: : i ‘ HT i i 
: : Se el my : £ iis oe i 


: 
i 
i 


- | « Approved For Refwdlse 1999/09/08 : CIA-RDP81 BofW9R000500020015-3 


if any, as herein provided. Unless otherwise specified, payment will 
be made on partial deliveries accepted by the Governucnt when the 
amount due on such deliveries so warrants; or, when requested by the 
Contractor, payment for accepted partial deliverics shall be made whun- 
ever’ such payment would equal or exceed cither $1,000 or 50% of the 
total amount of this contract. 


33. DEFAULT : L' 
L 


(a) The Government may, subject to the provisions of paragraph 

(bv) below, by written Notice of Default to the Contractor, terminate 
the whole or any part of this contract in any one of the following cir- 
— ewastancecs : _ oe nen 


(i) Ig the Contractor fails to make delivery of the supplics or 
to perform the services within the time specified herein or any exten- 
sion thereof; or : we 


(41) Tf the Contractor fails to perform any of the other provi- 
sions of this contract, or so fails to make progress as to endonger 
performance of this contract in accordance with its terms, and in either 
of these two circumstances does not cure such failure within a period 

of 10 days (or such longer period as the Contracting Officer may auth- 

, orize tn writing) after receipt of notice from the Contracting Officer 

' specifying such failure. 


(o) The Contractor shall not be liable for any excess costs, if 
_ any failure to perform the contract arises out of causes beyond the 
control and without the fault or negligence of the Contractor. Such 
causes include, but are not restricted to, acts of God or of the 
public enemy, acts of the Government, fires, floods, epidemics, quar~ 
antine restrictions, strikes, freight embargoes, unusually severe 
weather, and defaults of subcontractors duc to any of such causes 
wnhless the Contracting Officer shall determine that the supplies or 
services to be furnished by the subcontractor were obtainable from 
other sources in sufficient time to permit the Contractor to meet the 
required delivery schedule ; al 


(c) In the event the Government terminates this contract in whole 
or in part as provided in paragraph (a) of this clause, the Government 
_ May procure, upon such terms 3nd in such manner as the Contracting 
Officer may deem appropriate, supplies or services similar to those so 
terminated, and the Contractor shall be liable to the Government for 
any excess costs for such sinilar supplies or services, PROVIDED that 
the Contractor shall continue the performance of this contract to the 
extent not terminated under the provisions of this clause. 


(a4) If this contract is terrrinated as provided in paragraph (2) 
‘of this clause, the Governnent, in addition to any other rights pro- 
vided in this clause, may require the Contractor to transfer title 


FP (Oct. 8, 1956) 
Approved For Release 1999/09/08 2€1A-RDP81B00879R000500020015-3 


a rr es or 


* 


and dvliver to the Government, in the manner and to the extent dirceted 

:. by the ContraeclLing Officer, (1) any completed supplics, and (ii) such 

_ partially completed supplies and materials, parts, tools, dies, jigs, 
fixtures, plans, drawings, information and contract rights (hervin- 
after called "manufacturing materials") as the Contractor has speci- 
fically produced or specifically acquired for the performance of such 
part of this contract as has been terminated; and the Comtractor shall, 
upon direction of the Contracting Officer, protect and preserve pro- 
perty in possession of the Contractor in which the Goverment has an 
interest. The Government shall pay to the Contractor the contract 
price for completed supplies delivered to and accepted by the Govern- 
ment, and the amount agreed upon by the Contractor and the Contrac~ 
ting Officer for manufacturing materials delivered to and accepted 
by the Government and for the protection and preservation of property. 
Failure to agree shall be a dispute concerning a question of fact 
within the meaning of the clause of this contract entitled "Disputes." 


(ce) If, after notice of termination of this contract under the 
provisions of paragraph (a) of this clause, it is determined that the 
failure to perform this contract is due to causes beyond the control 
ond without the fault or negligence of the Contractor pursuant to the 
provisions of paragraph (bo) of this clause, such Notice of Default 
shall be deemed to have been issued pursuant to the clause of this 
contract entitled "Termination for Convenience of the Government," and 
the rights and obligations of the partics hereto shall in such event 
be governed by such clause. Except as otherwise provided in this 
contract, this paragraph (3) applies only if this contract is with a 
military department. 


(f) The rights and remedies of the Government provided in this 
clause shall not be exclusive and-are in addition to any other rights 


epnd remcdics provided by low or under this contract. 


34. ALTERATIONS IN CoNTRACT 


The fellowing alterations were made in this esntract prior to 
‘signature thereof by the parties to this contract: 


FP (Oct. 8, 1956) 
Price Rev. - 33- 


af 


| _Approved For Release 1999/09/08 : CIA-RDP81B00879R000500020015-3 


' . Approved For Reledlse 1999/09/08 : CIA-RDP81B00W9R000500020015-3 


por abs Bo ea tay ead TEREST ‘ ee es a ee ee 
& : + : i ‘a " 


