FOIAb3b. 


Sanitized ~ ABB Kus ROK RE GAR iB 


* 1963. 


AND ON HUMAN RESOURCES 


In their consideration of President Ken- 
nedy's persuasive discourse on foreign’ rela~ 
tions, we hope Utahans did not miss the im- 
pact of the speech he might have given but 
didn't. 

Nor should they miss the subtle compli- 
ment he paid to Utah and its people. 

As the White House had advertised, this 
swing West was primarily intended to look at 
and talk about conservation problems and 
projects. This has been the theme of almost 
all his addresses along the way. 

That he chose to give his major foreign 
policy address—his first since the ratification 
of the test ban treaty and his most com- 
prehensive reply to the rightwing critics of 
America's policy—in the Salt Lake Taber- 
nacie is a tribute to the audience he expected 
here, 

But equally significant were his few words 
about the real heart of conservation in Amer- 
ica—the conservation of human resources. 

Utah has been through some trying times 
with its educational crisis of recent months. 
Adverse publicity, unjustified but nonethe- 
less real, has spread across the country. It 
‘was good to hear the President of the United 
States tell the Nation that Utah leads Amer- 
ica in the percentage of its youth who finish 
high school and go on to college. 

One would hope that the deeper import of 
this fact was not lost on President Kennedy. 
He should understand that Utah, despite its 
economic problems, has managed this record 
on its own, It has shown that a State with 
the will and the ideals that he so graciously 
described as stemming from the first Pioneers 
in these valleys can do the job without 
Federal help. 

But if a sense of complacent satisfaction 
was all Utahans got from the President’s re- 
marks on youth conservation, his effort would 
have been wasted. Certainly with this rec- 
ognition of quantitative success we must ac- 
cept the challenge of achieving far greater 
qualitative success, 

It is not enough merely to send our young- 
sters to school longer. We must also send 
them to better schools, under better teachers, 
with better parental understanding and com- 
munity support of the problems. educators 
face. 

Thanks, Mr, President, for your kind words 
about Utah. Utahans now face the challenge 
to make ourselves more worthy of this kind 
of national recognition, 


[From the Salt Lake City (Utah) Tribune, 
Sept. 28, 1963] 


LEARNING To LiIvE IN A PERILOUS WoRLD 


President Kennedy lived up to the promise 
that he would deliver a major address of his 
western tour in Salt Lake City. While the 
address did not follow the. advance billing 
of a conservation theme, the broad foreign 
policy subject had a wider national and 
even international significance. 

It was a good speech, thoughtful and 
thought provoking. And it was nonpoliti- 
cal. 

Mr, Kennedy’s basic theme in his Taber- 
nacle address was the need for Americans to 
face the realities of a world in which we 
have responsibilities we cannot dodge, bur- 
dens we cannot shirk, and a world in which 
we must deal with problems so complex and 
baffling as to defy quick and easy solutions. 

It is understandable, the President said, 
that many Americans should look back with 
nostalgia to simpler times when we lived in 
safety and prosperity at a comfortable dis- 
tance from the rest of the world. 

But it is a simple fact, as Mr. Kennedy 
said, that today “we cannot turn our back 
on the world outside.” 

Like it or not, we are part of the world— 
and in this age of supersonic planes, mis- 
siles that can cross the ocean in minutes, 

- Weapons that can erase whole cities, and 
deadly radioactive clouds that can encircle. 


OCT 7 1963 


the globe—there is just no such thing as 
jsolation for the United States. 

The concept of a fortress America is as 
dead as the dodo. 

The question then is.how to face the reall- 
tiles of a world tn which we are inevitably 
deeply involved. 

Mr. Kennedy said one answer is to realize 
that we cannot by command remake the 
world in our own image. We must recognize 
that each nation is bound to act in terms 
of its own interest. We must accept the 
fact there are many complex and baffling 
problems which defy pat solution—that, as 
he said, “to adopt a black-and-white, all- 
or-nothing policy subordinates our inter- 
ests to our irritations.” : 

We must in fact have a policy of flexibil- 
ity. While being ever vigilant to protect 
American security against any threat, we 
must be ever ready to take steps which lead 
toward a more peaceful and stable world. 

This does hot mean appeasement. But it 
also does not mean mere belligerence. It 
means strength, but it also means reason- 
ableness and responsibility. 

Fundamentally this is the policy this Na- 
tion has been following ever since World 
War II, under three different administra- 
tions, both Democratic and Republican. 

‘It is a policy we must continue to follow, 
with. broad American public understanding 
and suppport. 

This is a perilous world. We cannot iso- 
late ourselves from it. We can only live in 


it if we are prepared to face its complex - 


and bafiling problems, realistically and with 
the kind of rational understanding for which 
Mr. Kennedy 50 effectively appealed. 


[From the Provo Herald, September 29, 1963] 
UTAHANS Get Lirt From KENNEDY VISIT 


In his concise remarks following President 
Kennedy's Utah address at the Mormon Tab- 
bernacle Thursday night, Senator Frank 
E. Moss told the Chief Executive: “you have 
given us a real lift tonight.” 

The comment seemed to pretty well fit the 
situation. The more than 8,000 persons who 
jammed the Salt Lake Tabernacle showed 
py the expressions on their faces that they 
did indeed get a “lift” from the President's 
appearance and his address. 

There were other thousands outside the 
tabernacle who lingered to hear the speec 
as it was broadcast over the Temple Square 
and who struggled in the crowd for a glimpse 
of the President. 

Crowds swarmed at the airport and hotel 
for a good look and the route of Mr. Ken- 
nedy’s motorcade was a sea of faces as men, 
women and children strained for a good look. 
Many Central Utahans traveled to Salt Lake 
City for an “in person” view of the. Presi- 
dent. 

But perhaps the people who received the 
biggest lift of all were the leaders of the 
Democratic Party in Utah who were walking 
on air and felt that the Demo stock went up 
several notches as a result of the President’s 
visit. The 1964 election will provide an ac- 
curate gage on this. In 1960 all of Utah’s 
electoral votes went to Richard Nixon, Mr. 
Kennedy’s Republican opponent. 

President Kennedy and his party, from all 
reports, were highly pleased with the Utah 
appearance and felt the warm reception and 
huge crowds capped anything else up to this 
point on the President’s 11-State tour. 

The visitors themselves couldn’t help he- 
ing impressed with a couple of observations 
during their memorable night at the Mormon 
Tabernacle. One was the respect Utahans 
have for their own President David O. McKay, 
who received as long a standing ovation as 
did President Kennedy; and the other was 
the tremendously-moving performance of 
the Tabernacle Choir which sang “America 
the Beautiful,” “The Star Spangled Banner,” 
and “The Battle Hymn of the Republic,’ as 
these selections are seldom sung. The per- 


Rear Ahr UU TS 9 RUUUQUUU4LU | 4a06 


formance drew loud praise fr6m the corps 
of newsmen accompanying the President. 

Yes, the President’s visit was a great oc- 
casion, from many standpoints. It provided 
a lift, all right—one which will be long re- 
membered. 


_ WHEAT SALES TO COMMUNIST- 
BLOC NATIONS 


Mr. YOUNG of North Dakota. Mr. 
President, I ask unanimous consent to 
have printed in the Appendix of the 
Recorp a resolution adopted by the five 
Northwest State Farmers Union presi- 
dents, Edwin Smith, of North Dakota; 
Leonard Kenfield, of Montana; Edwin 
Christianson, of Minnesota; Ben Rad- 
cliffe, of South Dakota; and Gilbert J. 
Rohde, of Wisconsin. I am in full accord 
with the position taken in this resolution. 

There being no objection, the resolu- 
tion was ordered to be printed in the 
RecorD, as follows: 

We believe that since Soviet Russia has be- 
come a signatory to the international wheat 
agreement beginning with the 1963 crop 
year, that it is reasonable to explore the pos- 
sibilities of a sale of American wheat for 
dollars or for gold. 

The International Wheat Agreement has 
been in force since 1949 and up to this time, 
Soviet Russia had been outside the agree- 
ment and has normally been an exporting 
rather than an importing nation. 3 

We would be favorable to an authorization 
making it possible for the United States to 
deal with any nation that is a signotory to 
the International Wheat Agreement. We 
consider it a good sign that more and more 
nations are joining in the orderly marketing 
of wheat in international trade. 

Farmers Union has historically taken the 
position that as long as there is hunger 
somewhere in the world, we should seek 
every way to make our abundant production 
available to the people. 


PLOT TO GET QO; 


Mr. THURMOND. 
akc “tf American public has been 
demanding a thorough investigation of 
the State Department. Newspapers and 
private citizens have joined in demand- 
ing that this bureaucratic nightmare be 
cleared out. In effect, there is wide- 


spread sentiment that the State Depart- 
ment is in bad need of a” meg 
Sere ears that a e of per- 


sonnel in the State Department is being 
attempted. Unfortunately, it is the very 
opposite of what the critics of the State 
Department had in mind, for it is, in 


r. President, for 


‘effect, an attempted purge of patriots. 


Reports in the press relate that the 
State Department has filed charges 


against Mr. Otto Otepka, Chief of the 


Security Evaluation Division. It seems 
clear that these charges are based pri- 
marily on the offense committed by Mr. 
Otepka in candidly telling the truth to 
a Senate committee. In addition, the 
State Department is reported to have is- 
sued directions that employees of the 
State Department are forbidden any 
contract with the Senate Internal Secu- 
rity Subcommittee or its staff. 

This matter raises the most serious 
and fundamental questions. In the first 
place, it appears to be a clear-cut case 
of retaliation against a Government em- 
ployee for cooperting with a Senate com- 
mittee. Congress should tolerate no 


Sanitized - Approved For Release : CIA-RDP75-00149R0006000401 25-7 


i 


17822 


sich retaliation, for this is an offense not 


“just against the individual, but also 


against the Congress; and if such action 
does not now constitute contempt of the 
Senate which is punishable by imprison- 
ment, it is the business of the Senate to 
close any loopholes, so that retaliation 
against any witness before a congres- 
sional committee will constitute a 
criminal offense with an appropriate 
penalty. 

This matter also brings into issue the 
so-called issue of executive privilege. 
From what appears in the press, it seems 
clear that not even the broadest defini- 
tion of this often misused doctrine could 
apply in the Otepka case, for no one con- 
tends that the so-called privilege can 
be claimed by other than the President 
himself. In this instance, it appears 
that the directive to State Department 
employees prohibiting contact with the 
Senate committee did not emanate from 
the President, but rather from a bureau- 
crat within the State Department itself. 

Mr. President, there are but two as- 
pects of this very serious matter. There 
are many other serious implications in 
this case, not the least of which is the 
security practices, or the lack of them, in 
the State Department. 

I sincerely hope that the Internal Se- 
curity Subcommittee of the Senate and 
the Judiciary Committee of the Senate 
will press its continuing investigation of 
this matter with vigor and resolve. The 
entire Senate should support this investi- 
gation. State Department’s attempted 
purge of patriots must not be tolerated, 
and this very attempt is further evidence 
that a thorough investigation of the en- 
tire State Department is in order. 

Mr. President, I ask unanimous con- 
sent that there be printed in the Recorp 
at this point in my remarks the follow- 
ing: 

A newspaper article from the Des 
Moines Sunday Register of October 6, 
entitled “How Security Clash Led to 
Aid’s Ouster,” over the byline of Mr. 
Clark Mollenhoff. 

A newspaper article from the Chicago 
Tribune of September 29, entitled “Clash 
Set Off by State Department’s Officer 
Firing,” over the byline of Mr. Willard 
Edwards. 

A newspaper article from the St. Louis 
Globe Democrat of October 2, entitled 
“State Department Official Said His Su- 
periors Lied,” over the byline of Mr. Ed- 
ward O’Brien. 

A newspaper article from the Wash- 
ington Evening Star of October 4, 1963, 
entitled “Otepka Row Widens as Senate 
Calls Rusk,” over the byline of Mr. Earl 
Voss. 

An editorial from the Charleston News 
and Courier of October 4, entitled “The 
Otepka Case.” 

An editorial from the Chicago Tribune 
entitled “State Department Coverup.” 

And an editorial from the St. Louis 
Globe Democrat of October 3, entitled 
“Plot To Get Otepka.” 

There being no objection, the articles 
and editorials were ordered to be printed 
in the Recorp, as follows: 


Sanitized - Approyed hac kel 


[From the Des Moines Register, Oct. 6, 1963] 
How Srcuntry’CYasir Lep To Ar’s Oustyn— 
OTEPKA QUESTIONED GUICK CLEARANCE 
(By Clark Mollenhoff) 

Wasnincron, U-C=tast June, six security 
officers walked into the office of State Depart~ 
ment Security Evaluator Otto Otepka, seized 
his records, and the contents of his safe and 
ousted him from his office. 

Otepka, 48, Chief of the Security Evalua- 
tion Division, was surprised and shaken by 
the ordeal of being unceremoniously removed 
from his responsibilities as a key figure in the 
State Department security program. 

In 1958, the veteran lawyer and career civil 
servant had received the State Department's 
meritorious service award. 

FALLEN FROM FAVOR 


In May 1962 Otepka was given the oppor- 
tunity for advanced executive training at the 
National War College. 

Why had an official with an outstanding 
record, and with tremendous responsibility in 
the administration of the State Department 
security program, fallen so far from favor 
with his superiors? 

There were no allegations that Otepka 
was a security risk, or that he had anything 
in his background to question his fitness to 
held the $16,965-a-year job. 

Otepka said last week that he asked John 
F. Reilly, Deputy Assistant Secretary of 
State for Security, for an explanation. 

Otepka said Reilly refused to give him a 
reason. 

On June 27, Otepka wes called to Reilly’s 
office, where Reilly informed him that he 
woulc! have a new special assignment—pre- 
paring a handbook on security matters. 

Otepka was informed that he would be 
moved from his office, room 3333 in the 
State Department Building, to a small office, 
and that he would be provided with secre- 
tarial services only upon request through 
Reilly’s office. 

ENTERED OFFICE 


As Otepka and Reilly walked from Reilly's 
office to OtepKa’s office, six security officers 
joined them and entered Otepka’s office. 
Otepka was asked for the combinations to his 


safes, and access to all other material in 
his office, 
Reilly and the six officials combed 


the office and ar- 
combinations on 


through the records in 
ranged to change the 
OtepKa’s 14 safes. 

After about 20 minutes, Otepka was per- 
mitted to leave for a luncheon engagement. 
When he returned, Otepka found he was 
barrecl from his own. office. 

He went to Reilly's office, asked for an 
explanation, and requested that he be given 
access to information in his office that he 
would need for carrying out the new assign- 
ment in writing the security handbook. 

Otepka said Reilly declined to discuss the 
reasons for the action. : 

Otepka said that Reilly lectured him 
briefly on “institutional loyalty” to the 
State Department. Otepka said he replied 
that “loyalty to country should be first and 
paramount.” 

Although Otepka was surprised at the 
method of removing him from his duties, 
the sharp friction had keen apparent for 
several months. 

In fact, Otepka did not attend the National 
War College because his own investigation 
indicated that the move was an effort to 
get rid of him. : 

The source of the friction was obvious. 
Otepka was transferred in 1953 from the Civil 
Service Commission to the State Department 
Security Division in the regime of the late 
R. W. Scott McLeod. 


ase : CIA-RDP75-00149R0006000401 25-7 
L RECORD — SENATE 


October 7 


To many Democrats anc within some for- 
eign service circles at the 3iate Department, 
there was a sharp antagonism to any person 
regarded as having been » part of the Mc- 
Leod organization. 

Otepka, a Government erployee since 1936, 
served as deputy to McLeod, and was part of 
a& small team that had bevr. responsible for 
instituting tighter security regulations and 
procedures under the Eisenhower adminis- 
tration. Otepka continued as deputy after 
McLeod became Ambassador to Ireland, and 


‘it was long after McLeod laft that Otepka 


received his meritorious seivice award. 

When the Kennedy administration came 
into power in 1961, Otepka was dropped from 
his deputy job to that of chief security 
evaluator, This was a slig’: drop in status, 
although his civil service rsting and salary 
remained on the same leve!, 

The New Frontier had seme new views on 
how the State Departme-:: security pro- 
cedures should be handled. ‘7he tighter rules 
and regulations instituted under the Eisen- 
hower administration werc regarded as un- 
reasonably tight. Some officials attacked the 
preeinployment investigatior.s of some per- 
sonnel as insulting. 

Otepka took issue with ‘hose who sought 
to change the security rules. He had a face- 
to-face disagreement witn the Assistant 
Secretary of State Harlan Cloveland, 

He also disagreed with Clsveland on sev- 
eral individuals who were ni med to a panel 
that was to study security program opera- 
tions. 

Otepka held that the sec wity filles of sev- 
eral persons being named «c the panel dis- 
closed such questionabie imdivity that they 
should be given a full FBI in vestigation, and 
some should be rejected even before an FBI 
report. 

Cleveland and: some othcr high State De- 
partment officials insisted that these men 
should be named to the panel and Otepka 
was overridden. 

Otepka objected to the Stace Department’s 
frequent use of emergency security clear- 
ance for officials being appc.ir-ted. 

ONLY FIVE TIMES 

The law provided for emergency security 
clearance by the Secretary oi State for pur- 
poses of speeding through a1 appointment, 
and when the Secretary of tate wished to 
take personal responsibility yor the naming 
of some person who was regurdied as doubtful 
by the security division. 

In the Fisenhower adniiaistration, the 
emergency security clearan:e was used only 
five times in unusual cases, but Secretary of 
State Dean Rusk has used eriergency clear- 
ance more than 150 times. 

Many of these people were hired without 
the knowledge of Otepka. 

Otepka testified freely on tis views before 
the Senate Internal Security Subcommittee. 

Called before the Interns! Security Com- 
mittee, he also testified frankly on his views 
on such wicely publicized vases as those of 
William Wieland and John Steward Service. 

He testified that he had i:pposed the con- 
tinued employment of both Wieland and 
Service as unsuitable for eniployment. He 
had. never made a finding tat either was 
disloyal. 

SLATED FOR Pcs'* 

Otepka’s work in back fites of the State 
Department produced much cf the informa- 
tion on Wieland’s role in Cuba and Wieland's 
strong support of Cuban Premier Fidel 
Castro. 

When the Kennedy adm nistration came 
into power, the State Depar:rent personnel 
office had slated Wieland fcr assignment to 
a highly sensitive post in Germany. 

FBI Director J. Edgar Hocver, who had 
strong feelings about the Wieland case. went 


Sanitized - Approved For Release : CIA-RDP75-00149R0006000401 25-7 


1963" 


to Attorney General Robert Kennedy. Attor- 
ney General Kennedy intervened to block 
the assignment of Wieland to any post con- 
sidered as sensitive. ; 

Although Wieland has continued in the 
Department, he has been assigned to paper 
shuffling jobs. Otepka has been of the opin- 
ion that Wieland should be forced to retire. 

In his testimony, Otepka has been critical 
of the decisions of superiors. 

He also has found himself at odds with 
some of the higher officials of the State De~ 
partment as to facts, and this indicated that 
errors or perjury were involved in the testi- 
mony of Otepka or those who gave contra- 
dictory testimony. 

The Senate Internal Security Subcommit- 
tee asked Otepka 1f he could support his 
testimony with documents. Otepka pro- 
duced memorandums and other information 
from State Department files to support his 
story. 


SUBCOMMITTEE ENRAGED 


The barring of Otepka from his office in 
what appeared to be retaliation for cooper- 
ating with the subcommittee resulted in a 
congressional effort to question Rusk. 

Many subcommitee members—Democrats 

‘and Republicans—were enraged with the lack 
of cooperation from the State Department 
and the evidence indicating retaliation. 
However, they said they did not believe Rusk 
was aware of the details of the problem. 

Since early July, Senator Txomas Donn, 
Democrat, of Connecticut, has been seeking 
to arrange a hearing with Rusk. 

On September 23, Reilly filed notice of 
charges against Otepka. He charged that 
Otepka had given State Department informa~ 
tion to unauthorized persons, and named the 
person as Jay Sourwine, chief counsel for 
the Internal Security Committee. 

BILL OF PARTICULARS 

Dopp went to New York last Wednesday to 
serve a bill of particulars on Rusk and to ask 
for an explanation. Rusk has indicated he 


, will make himself avatiable for questioning 


this week in a case that has the potential for 
political explosiveness that would rank it 
with the Alger Hiss prejury case. 

The bill of particulars sent to Rusk charged 
that there has-been a coverup of laxity in 
the security operations at the State Depart- 
ment, and specifically alleges perjury by some 
State Department officials. 

Also at issue will be the recently issued 
State Department:orders that will require 
that all State Department officlals refuse to 
talk to Congressmen. or the staff members of 
congressional committees unless there has 
been notice and approval by the State De- 
partment. : 

This is being lashed in Congress as “an 
outrageous” interference with the right of 
Congress to Investigate as well as an inter- 
ference with the right of free speech. 


[From the Chig: , Sept. 29, 1963] 


Cuasu Ser Orr By. STATE DEPARTMENT OFFICER 
FIRING-—OUSTER BLAMED ON AID TO SENATE 


INQUIRY : 
(By Willard Edwards) 
WasHiInctron, Septémber 28—The charges 


against a State Department security officer 
who was notified that he is to be removed 
from Office include an allegation that he re- 
vealed a “confidential” report which had 
been sent to McGeorge Bundy, special assist- 
ant to President Kennedy. 

This was learned today as developments 
indicated a head-on clash between the State 
Department and the Senate Internal Security 
Subcommittee headed by Senator JAMES O. 
EASTLAND, Democrat, of Mississippi. 

COOPERATED WITH COMMITTEE 
: Otto F. Otepka, 48, Chief of the Division 
of Evaluations in the Department’s office of 
security, is the central figure in this contro- 
versy. Charges against him were filed Sep- 
; tember 23. He was given until October 3 


to answer but his attorney, Roger Robb, to- 
day obtained a 10-day extension. ° 

EASTLAND noted that the main burden of 
the charges against Otepka was that he co- 
operated with the Senate subcommittee in- 
vestigating operations of the State Depart- 
ment’s security office. 

“The powers of Congress are at stake,” 
EASTLAND said, “and I intend to protect Mr. 
Otepka, by every means at my commend, 
against accusations which complain, in ef- 
fect, that he told the truth when asked to 
do so by a Senate subcommittee.” 

“BURN BAG” SEARCHED 


The subcommittee will meet early next 
week to consider procedures to follow in a 
conflict reminiscent of those of a decade 
ago when Congress was defied by the execu- 
tive department in investigations of the loy- 
alty of Federal employees. 

The State Department admitted Thursday 
that a letter of charges had been filed 
against Otepka. It refused to disclose the 
nature of the charges and its reluctance was 
explairiable when a reporter obtained a copy 
of them today. : 


Much of the’ evidence, upon which the 


charges are based, came from surreptitious 


examination of Otepka’s “burn bag,” in .- 


which he placed 
destruction. 

John F. Reilly, the Department’s Assistant 
Secretary of Security, one of the officials 
questioned by the subcommittee in its in- 
vestigation, ordered this classified trash bag 
secretly searched, It was marked with a 
red X when taken to the State Department's 
mail room and turned over to Reilly, who 
put the little bag in his brief case , 


ALL DISCARDS STUDIED 


Torn pieces of paper were pasted together. 
All carbons were studied. One-time type- 
writer ribbons were examined. On the basis 
of what was found John Ordway, chief of the 
personnel operations division, accused 
Otepka of conduct unbecoming an officer 
of the State Department. 

Last June 18, the charges stated a con- 
fidential report to Bundy at the White House, 
written by William H. Brubeck, Special As- 
sistant to Secretary of State Dean Rusk and 
Executive Secretary of the State Depart- 
ment, was found tn Otepka’s burn bag. It 
was not the original but a duplicator copy 
and the tops and bottoms of pages of the 
aforementioned document had been cut off, 
removing the confidential notation. 


OTHER CHARGES LODGED 


This deciassification and mutilation of a 
classified document was in violation of law. 
Otepka was informed. There was no dis- 
closure of the contents of the report to 
Bundy but it presumably referred to se- 
curity conditions in the State Department, 
the subject of the Senate inquiry. 

Otepka was. also charged: 

1. With furnishing a copy of @ classified 
memorandum concerning elght State Depart- 


security materlal for 


‘ment employes to J. G. Sourwine, chief 


counsel of the Senate Subcommittee. The 
memorandum dealt with the loyalty of the 
employees and ite disclosure was a breach of 
the standard of conduct expected of a State 
Department officer. 

2. With furnishing a copy of a Classified 
memorandum concerning the processing of 
the appointments of members of the Advisory 
Committee on International Organizations 
to a person outside the Department. This 
‘was stated to be a violation of former Presi- 
dent Truman’s 1948 directive holding all rec- 
ords relative to the loyalty of Government 
employees to be confidential. 

8. Declassification of a confidential docu- 
ment addressed to the Security Department 
from John Noonan, supervisory security 
specialist on the subject of a security meet- 
ing in the Department. 

FIND QUESTIONS HE WROTE 


4, Declassification of a confidential memo- 
randum addressed to Otepka from Frederick 


anitized - Approved For Release : CIA-RDP75-00149R000600040125-7 
CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE 


17823 


W. Traband, supervisor of personnel security, 
on the subject: “Security evaluative serv- 
ices” of two department branches. 

5. Declassification of a memorandum to 
J. M. Barta, international relations officer, 
concerning procedures for reviewing and dis- 
posing of adverse information on employees 
of international organizations dealing with 
inter-American affairs. 

A carbon found in the burn bag, the letter 
of charges stated, revealed questions pre- 
pared by Otepka to be used by Sourwine, 
the subcommittee counsel, in the interroga- 
tion of Reilly, the deputy assistant secretary 
for security, when he appeared before the 
subcommittee, Sourwine asked these ques- 
tions of Reilly, it was stated. 

On June 10, a typewriter ribbon in the bag 
disclosed a set of 24 questions phrased by 
Otepka to be used in questioning another 
State Department official, Sourwine asked 
15 of these questions. : 


EVIDENCE CALLED DYNAMITE 


The Otepka case has been a subject of 
whispered comment in Washington for 
months. Otepka is regarded as a highly re- 
spected veteran of the Security Department, 
responsible for exposing a number of disloy- 
alty cases in his 10 years in the State 
Department. 

The Senate inquiry on conditions in the 
Department’s security office was instigated 
months ago. Otepka testified for 6 days in 
secret hearings and one listening Senator 
described his evidence as “political dyna- 
mite.” 

Secretary of State Rusk was summoned 
to testify but put off an appearance by plead- 
ing the pressure of other affairs. He finally 
agreed to appear August 30 but, for reasons 
not made public, was given an indefinite stay 
shortly before he was to have testified. 

Otepka meanwhile had been put under 
close surveillance. He retained his title as 
Chief of the Security Evaluations Office, a 
$16,000 post, but was transferred from his 
office to a cubbyhole. This office was 
“bugged” and his phone was tapped. The 
Federal Bureau of Investigation was called 
in to interrogate him. 

A number of State Department officials 

were questioned by the subcommittee. But 
others were forbidden by the State Depart- 
ment to testify. 
_ The State Department was reportedly 
alarmed lest the Senate subcommittee’s dis- 
closures should be made public before or 
during Senate debate on the treaty of Mos- 
cow, banning nuclear weapons tests in the 
atmosphere and underwater. 

The letter of charges against Otepka was 
given to him on the day before the Senate 


Yatified the treaty. He engaged Robb, a 


Washington attorney, and asserted his de- 
termination to fight what he regarded as 
harassment for performance of his duty. © 

A congressional statute declares that all 
civil service employees have the right to give 
information to Congress and may not be 
restrained in that right. The Truman di- 
rective, issued in the year that the Alger 
Hiss perjury-espionage case was exposed, ap- 
pears to confilct with that statute. ‘ 

The claim of “executive privilege,” the 
right of the President to withhold any in- 
formation about Government employees in 
the public interest, has been invoked by the 
Truman, Hisenhower, and Kennedy admin- 
istrations, 


—— 


[From the St, Loule.<vobe-Democrat, Oct. 2, 
1963] 

Srate DEpaARTMENT OFFIcIAL Says His Svu- 
PERIORS LIgpD—OTEPKA DzNIES GIVING Sz- 
CRET DaTa TO SENATE—FORMER CUBAN 
Policy ApvVisEr’s Recorp INVOLVED 

(By Edward W,.QBrien) 
WASHINGYON=Otto F, Otepka, State De- 
partment security official who has been 
threatened with dismissal, charged Tuesday 
that “my superiors” in the Department gave 


Sanitized - Approved For Release : CIA-RDP75-00149R0006000401 25-7 


Atrue” testimony about the handling of 


mittee. 

Mr. Otepka, who for 10 years held a key 
position in granting security clearances to 
State Department officers and employees, said 
the current charges against him stem from 
the fact that he had sought to refute the 
allegedly false statements he felt reflected on 
his performance. 


DENIES CHARGES 


In sn exclusive interview, Mr. Otepka 
denied he ever had furnished classified docu- 
ments or other restricted information to any 
unauthorized person. 

He sald he had answered certain questions 
by the Senate Internal Security Subcommit- 
tee, but only after the subcommittee had 
initiated its own investigation of State De- 
partment security procedures. 

He said he had declined to ‘name names” 
in the individual personnel cases under study 
by the subcommittee, but since he was under 
oath, “T could not and did not deny I had 
official knowledge of these cases.” 

The State Department filed 138 charges 
against Mr. Otepka on September 23 as a 
preliminary to forcing his dismissal from the 
Government. 

Friends of Mr. Otepka have said the 
charges amount to an allegation that he 
cooperated with the Senate subcommittee, 
which long has been keeping State Depart- 
ment personnel security procedures under 
review. ¥ 

In the interview, Mr. Otepka said he in- 
tends to fight the charges through Civil Serv- 
ice Commission channels. Several Members 
of Congress have come to his support, saying 
the real issue is whether Congress can obtain 
information from executive departments 
without inviting reprisals against Govern- 
ment witnesses. 

A Senate Internal Security Subcommittee 
report on October 16, 1962, gave high praise 
to Mr. OtepKa as a personnel security officer. 

The report stated that his unfavorable 
recommendations against William Wieland, 
a top-ranking State Department official in 
deciding policy toward Fidel Castro during 
Castro’s rise to power in Cuba, had brought 
harm to Mr. Otepka's State Department 
career. 

It became evident Tuesday that Mr. 
Otepka’s new troubles arose out of the sub- 
committee’s continued interest in the Wie- 
land and other controversial State Depart- 
ment security cases. 

Barly this year, the subcommittee began 
delving into additional State Department 
personnel cases. As Deputy Security Director 
and Chief Security Evaluator for the De- 
partment, Mr. Otepka was summoned to tes- 
tify in executive session. 

He said Tuesday the three main charges 
against him now are that he gave classified 
information to Subcommittee Counsel J. G. 
Sourwine tn violation of a 1948 Presidential 
order restricting the flow of information to 
congressional committees. 

Mr. Otepka told this newspaper he “did 
not run to Mr. Sourwine.” Upon being asked 
to testify, he said, “I did so, as I always have, 
with the Department’s permission and guid- 
ance and with the knowledge of my su- 
periors.” 

When Mr. Sourwine’s questions got into an 
area, where I had knowledge, Mr. Otepka said, 
he could not and did not give substantive 
information on the individual cases. 

Later, he said, his superiors in the Depart- 
ment, whom he did not name, also testified, 
telling the subcommittee that the individual 
cases in question had never been called to 
their attention by Mr. Otepka. 

TESTIMONY CONFLICTS 

“This put their testimony in conflict with 
mine and with my official knowledge. Their 
testimony was untrue,’ Mr. Otepka said. 


értain personnel cases to a Senate subconi- | 


Since his superiors had used the subcom- 
mittee forum to make their statements, Mr. 
Otepka said, he felt entitled to rebut their 
statements and present the true facts. 

He said the best evidence he could present 
was documentation which I myself had 
classified in the first place. He said these 
documents proved that he brought the dis- 
puted cases to his superiors’ notice and that 
they had acknowledged the notices in their 
own handwrting, : 

“I have a right to defend myself,” he said. 
“Tm not going to run to my superiors and 
seek permission to rebut their testimony. 
That would be a lot of nonsense. 

“I'm charged with violating an order when 
all I did was to defend myself.” 

For his second subcommittee appearance, 
Mr. Otepka said, he had dictated to his sec- 
retary a rough draft of the points he wished 
to cover. To this, he attached the docu- 
ments “which I myself had classified and 
which I wished to place in the subcommittee 
record.” 

He said he gave one copy to Mr. Sourwine 
and put the other copy in his office safe. 

The State Department’s charges relate, he 
said, that the typewritter ribbon which was 
used. by his secretary, was picked out of his 
“purn bag’ for office debris and reconstructed 
by his superiors. This led to several of the 
specific counts against him in the charges, he 
said. 


{From the Washington Star, Oct. 4, 1963] 
OrerKA Row WIDENS as SENATE CALLs Rusk 
(By Earl H, Voss) 


The Senate Judiciary Committee has sent 
Secretary of State Rusk a strongly worded 
demand. to produce witnesses, including Mr. 
Rusk: himself, to discuss security procedures 
in the State Department. 

Senator Dopp, Democrat, of Connecticut, 
vice chairman of the Judiciary Committee’s 
Subcommittee on Internal Security, made a 
special trip to New York Wednesday to deliver 
personally a 10-page memorandum to Mr. 
Rusk. 

The memorandum and covering letter 
signed by Judiciary Cornmittee Chairman 
Eastianp, Democrat, of Mississippi, was ap- 
proved by the comumittee’s members. 

Senator Epwarp M. Kennepy, Democrat, of 
Massachusetts, arid brother of the President, 
did not dissent from the Judiciary Commit- 
tee’s decision to send the memorandum to 
Mr. Rusk, according to congressional sources. 

MAYOR FLAP BREWING 


The personal approach by Senator Dopo to 
Mr. Eiusk followed the State Department’s an- 
nouncement last Friday of charges filed 
against its chief security evaluator, Otto F. 
Otepka, which could result in his discharge. 

Mr. OtepkKa is accused of passing classified 
information on loyalty and security cases in 
the State Department to the Senate Internal 
Security Subcomnmnittee in violation of a 1948 
Executive order, 

The subcommittec believed it had obtained 
a commitment from the State Department 
that there would be no reprisals against em-~- 
ployees testifying before the committee. 

The Department, according to the under- 
standing of congressional sources, claims its 
action against Mr. Otepka is not in reprisal 
for his testimony but a consequence of im- 
proper actions, arnong them mutilating and 
improperly declassifying information on 
State Department employees loyalty. 

Mr, Otepka intends to fight the charges 
through civil service channels and into the 
courts, if necessary. 

The Judiciary Committee has asked Mr. 
Rusk for a full report on the Otepka case 
from qualified State Department officials as 
well as other information on security proce- 
dures in the Department. 

The Senate subcommittee has heard testi- 
mony leading it to believe the State Depart- 


” Sanitized - Approved For Release : CIA-RDP75-00149R000600040125-7 
CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE 


Octebax. 7 


ment has been Jax in protecting the national 
security. 

A recent subcommittes report indicates, 
for instance, that Mr. Rusk approved more 
than 150 waivers of security clearances of 
new employees by mid-193:!, One-fourth of 
these waivers were backda:ed, the subcom- 
mittee was told. 

Senators on the Inter: Security Sub- 
committee are also said to be concerned 
about cases of possible perjury by State De- 
partment witnesses who have come before 
them. 

RUSK BREAKS CATES 


Secretary Rusk decided several weeks ago 
thab only he himself shoud testify for the 
State Department before .be committee. 

On August 15 member; 27f the State De- 
partment’s Bureau of Sec.uity and Consular 
Affairs and the Office of Security, where Mr. 
Otepka has heen working. vere forbidden to 
contact the Senate Intern u Security Sub- 
committee without permi:sion. 

Mr. Rusk has broken scv2ral dates to ap- 
pear before the subcommlitze because of the 
press of other business. One intervening 
event was his trip to Moscow in August to 
sign. the partial nuclear test -ban treaty. 

Since he received the Judiciary Commit- 
tee’s Memorandum, however, Mr. Rusk now is 
reported by Department cificials to have de- 
cided other State Department employees may 
testify before the subcomnittee. He still 
intends to appear himself :« er, it is reported. 
[From the Charleston News and Courier, Oct. 

4, 1963] 


THE OTEPKA CASE 


The persecution of Ott:. Otepka, Chief of 
the Evaluation Division of the Office of Se-~ 
curity in the U.S. State Department, cries 
out for public attention. 

Determined efforts are bei ag made to drive 
Mr, Otepka from Government service, ap- 
parently because he discu:s:a State Depart- 
ment security risks with the Internal Securi- 
ty Subcommittee of the ‘Senate Judiciary 
Committee, The subcommittee is reported to 
have heard, testimony that Eiarlan Cleveland, 
Assistant Secretary of State ‘or International 
Affairs, is appointing persons with question- 
able security backgrounds. The grave alle- 
gation was made that Mr. Cleveland inquired 
as to whether Alger Hiss, cc nvicted perjurer 
and symbol of disloyalty to tae United States, 
could be brought back int) the State De- 
partment. : 

In view of the fact that persons of proven 
disloyalty have held high austs in the State 
Department in years past, tiie subcommittee 
has a duty to dig deeply into the new 
charges. 

The immediate task is icr Mr, Otepka to 
be protected against vincictive persons in 
the State Department. We inderstand there 
are portions of the United Siates Code which 
clearly assert the right and c‘uty of executive 
branch officials to confer aid exchange in- 
formation with officials of the legislative 
branch. A precedent musi: not be estab- 
lished whereby leftwingers in the State De- 
partment can silence or punish loyal Ameri- 
cans who have information of disloyal 
activities. 

Senator Onin D. Jouwston, of South 
Carolina, is the ranking member of the 
Senate Judiciary Commitie». He has par- 
ticipated in many investigations of security 
problems. We hope that tieaator JoHNSTON 
will devote his attention to. the case of Otto 
Otepka, and will investigate the grave charge 
that security risks are being eased back into 
the State Department. 

[From the Chicago Tribune] 
THE Strate DEPARTMEN' COVERUP 


The Senate Judiciary Cormaittee has taken 
the unprecedented action cf dispatching a 
U.S. Senator to deliver by nind to Secretary 


Sanitized - Approved For Release : CIA-RDP75-00149R000600040125-7 


ba 


- 
* 


19 


of State Rusk a letter from the full com- 
mittee. The letter is described as command- 
ing the Secretary to cease obstructing an 
investigation of frightening breaches of 
security within the Department or aocept 
the consequences of public exposure: 

The letter was carried to New York City, 
where Rusk is conferring with the Soviet 
and British Foreign Ministers, by Senator 
Tuomas J. Dopp, vice chairman of the Sen- 
ate Internal Security Subcommittee. Mr. 
Dopp was accompanied by the subcommittee 
counsel. The Senator also delivered a cov- 
ering letter from Senator JaMEs O. EASTLAND, 
chairman of the Judiciary Committee, in- 
forming Secretary Rusk that the committee 
intended to meet the challenge posed by & 
State Department order forbidding em- 
ployees to testify. 

The Department has brought -charges 
against one officer who did testify pefore the 
subcommittee. The witness, Otto F, Otepka, 
Chief of the Division of Evaluations in the 
Department’s Office of Security, is accused of 
disclosing to the subcommittee Department 
reports which were classified as confidential, 
It is understood that he detailed evidence 
of suspected disloyalty which appalled 
Senators, 

The Judiciary Committee has notified Sec- 
retary Rusk that it will defend Otepka’s 
right to testify under provisions of the 
‘United States Code and in conformity with 
woncurrent resolutions of the House and 
Senate adopted in 1958. Mr. Rusk has re- 
sponded that he will appear before the com- 
mittee and present his Department's view. 

In its letter to the Secretary, the commit- 
tee has charged that a high offictal of the 
Department gave false testimony to the sub- 
committee under oath. The whole pattern 
of interference with the subcommittee’s in- 
quiry suggests that the State Department 
knows that it is culpable and is trying to 
suppress a scandal which could rock the 
administration, 

This is not the first time that an attempt 
fas been made to push Otepka out of the 
Department. T'wo years ago the administra- 
tion announced that 25 trained security 
agents were to be hacked out of the Depart- 
ment’s Bureau of Security and Consular Af- 
fairs for reasons of “economy.” Thelr two 
chiefs, Otepka and Elmer Hipsiey, were to be 
ditched with them. Because of an uproar in 
Congress, Otepka was permitted to keep his 
title, but his duties were Umited. 

It might be thought that the administra- 
tion would be eager to expose security risks, 
to get rid of them, and perhaps to prosecute 
them. But it is not. The reason for this 
strange attitude is that President Kennedy; 
Attorney General Kennedy, and other leaders 
of the New Frontier are on record as having 
said that there was little or no danger of 
internal subversion. In their view, commu- 
nism. was strictly a menace from outside, 
although these days they are not even acting 
as if they believed that. 

So it is embarrassing to have public serv- 
ants challenging the official thesis by turning 
up instances of disloyalty within the admin- 
istration and imparting the information toa 
Senate body which has been zealous in ex- 
posing subversive infiltration of the Govern- 
ment. What would become of the argument 
that there is nothing to investigate if an- 
other Alger Hiss scandal were brought to 
light? 


[From the St. Louls Globe-Democrat, 
Oct. 3, 1963] 
Prot To Ger OTEPKA? 

Now it begins to appear there is more be- 
hind the effort to oust Otto F. Otepka, State 
Department security officlal, than was first 
suspected wher he was accused of giving 
Department secrets to Congress—as though 
that: could jeopardize the security of the 
Nation, 


the plot against him goes even peyond th 


Sanitized - ARR QVEd FOS RElSREEG RYARBRR INO 1 49R0006000401 26h, 


tates, 


Suspicion is strong in ‘pron beyond HN Stat to the productive facilities of their 


State Department—that the character Mov- 
ing in on Otepka is a more powerful figure 
in our Government than the Secretary of 
State—none other than the President's 
brother, Attorney General Bobby Kennedy. 

What's it all about? 

It’s not so much that Mr. Otepka told & 
Benate subcommittee some things the State 
Department didn’t want Congress to know— 
especially about William Wieland, a top- 
ranking State official who did nothing to 
stop Castro's rise to power in Cuba. 

It's more because Mr. Otepka is a career 
man in Government service of unquestioned 
loyalty who thinks Congress is entitled to 
know what's going on, who wants real secu~ 
rity methods carried out in every Federal 
agency. 

In his security post, his signature was re- 
quired on all appointments to the State 
Department, except for the very top posts 
filled by the White House. 

And Mr, Otepka had been exercising this 
authority to maintain the security reforms 
instituted under the Eisenhower administra- 
tion. : 

In other words, Mr. Otepka has been a 
Jhpard-line, anti-Communist State Department 
official—just like Miss Frances Knight, Di- 
rector of the Passport Office, who has been 
in constant hot water with her superiors 
for the same reason. 

He has tried to keep strange and curious 
people out of jobs in the Department for 
whose security he was responsible. 

That is how he has run afoul not only of 
this own superiors but alse of that even higher 
power who operates in the Justice Depart~ 
lent. It's not national secrets but appar- 
ently but personnel matters that have got 
him into trouble. 

With Bobby Kennedy trying to move Ken- 
medy people to Tun things the adminis- 
tration way, Mr. OtepKa drew the Itne at 
some characters he considered dubious. 

The flimsy charges about what he told 
the Senate subcommittee are reported in- 
cidental to getting rid of the State De- 
partment security official who guarded the 
door. 

It is not Mr. Otepka and his activities 
which need investigation. It is the plot of 
those who have been spying on him and 
snooping around his “burn bag” and doing 
other petty things in their efforts to oust 

The Senate Internal Security Subcom- 
mittee, which gave him high pralse as a per- 
sonnel security officer only a year ago, sho 
launch such a probe. 


PORK BARREL GR ECON 
FOUNDATIONS? 


Mr. McGOVERN. Mr. President, per- 
jedically throughout the history of our 
country, the charge has been made that 
the Federal Government runs a public 
works pork barrel, squandering millions 
of dollars on foolish projects. 

Most recently Life magazine has done 
a major, widely circulated “expose” of 
the Federal public works ‘‘pork barrel.” 

Generally these attacks are pursued 
with more zeal than knowledge, with 
more innuendo than facts, and some- 
times with more political motivation 
than concern. 

Life magazine punctured its recent 
pork barrel argument when it attempted 
to contrast good and bad public works. 
The article closed with a description of 
the $60 million Toledo Bend Dam built 


Cc 


by the States of Texas and Louisiana 
as a huge and economically viable addi- 


‘The article continued that by building 
this fine dam themselves, the States 
saved the people of the United States 
from another costly raid on their Treas- 
ury. 

It is, of course, unreasonable to con- 
tend that a project financed by the First 
State Bank is an economically viable 
addition to the productive facilities of 
a community but that the same project, 
financed by the Frst National Bank, is 
a raid on the Treasury. 

Yet this strange thesis was the basis of 
the article. 

Texas and Louisiana are to be con- 
gratulated for moving ahead with the 
Toledo Bend Dam. Progressive State 
administrations are increasingly coming 
+o understand that public works projects 
trigger economic development and that 
they can return many times their cost 
in primary and secondary benefits. 

We need more State projects—more 
State participation in development 
efforts—to speed our economic growth 
rate and meet the needs of a growing 
population, including more business op- 
portunities and employment. 

We are moving to make State partici- 
pation possible in the water and related 
resources field. The Interior and Insular 
Affairs Committee has just held hear- 
ings on a@ bill, S. 1111 by Senator CLin- 
Ton ANDERSON, to provide aid to the 
States for water resources planning and 
to speed cooperative Federal-State plan- 
ning of major river basins. As the plan- 
ning job is completed, units of coordi- 
nated river basin plans can be under- 
taken by either or both partners to the 
planning, without interfering with the 
final optimum development of the water 
resource. 

But Federal public works projects can- 
not be halted because someone argues— 
as Life magazine did—that what is non- 
Federal is wonderful but if it is Federal it 
is a wasteful pork barrel raid. 

Mr. President, I ask unanimous con- 
gent to have printed in the Reconrp a brief 
‘extract from the Life article, which is the 
basis of my comment. 

There being no objection, the excerpt 
was ordered to be printed in the Rrc- 
orp, as follows: 7 

EXceRPT From LIFE MAGAzINge 

While the pork barrel rolls along distrib- 
uting money by the billion, the States of 
Texas and Louisiana are trying out a unique 
experiment in homegrown economy. Both 
States have taken their shares of Federal 
pork in the past and may well do so in the 
future. But at Toledo Bend on the Sabine 
River that separates the States they are 
building a $60 million dam with their own 
money. : 

An aura of healthy self-interest and anti- 
big-Government sentiment surrounds the 
project. ‘We retain local control and we are 
not contributing to larger and larger gov- 
ernment.” Simmons said recently. ‘I don’t 
pelieve in this sitting back and waiting. Too 
often we have waited so long the Federal 
Government came in and filled a void that 
should have been handled by the States, It 
"was our own fault.” 

In the end, creating a huge and econom- 
ically viable addition to the productive fa- 
cilities of their States, the people of Louisi- 
ans and Texas felt their breasts swelling 
with the pride of independence. 


Sanitized - Approved For Release : CIA-RDP75-00149R0006000401 25-7 


. 


aaa 


Sanitized - Approved For Release : CIA-RDP75-00149R000600040125-7 _ . 


17826 


“Toledo Bend,” said Louisiana Gov. Jimmie 
Davis at the ground breaking ceremony, “is 
a testimonial to the efficiency and work- 
ability of the principle of States’ rights.” 

It also saved the people of the United 
States from another costly raid on their 
Treasury. * \ 


Mr. President, 
sometimes I beNeve that these periodic 
attacks on Fedéral public works are 
beneficial. They remind those of us who 
realize the positiv&. values of Federal 
public works investntents that it is not 
enough to ale in eeonoMs worth, and 


their key role in econofgic growth, our- 
selves. They remind us&that the good 
these great programs do st be told to 
the public, and told repedkedly, if the 
truth is to prevail over the Snsational- 
ism of detractors. i, 

This has a special urgency By 
of us from the Upper Missoun't: 
basin, and indeed for all the 
States. s 
proposed large scale water, timber, reye- 
ation and highway programs, and p%& 
ticularly to the completion of water pr. 
grams which are essential to agricultural; 
municipal and industrial growth. 

In my own State, at the present stage 
of water resource development, tens of 
thousands of acres of our best agricul- 
tural lands have been inundated or com- 
mitted to reservoirs without compen- 
sating reclamation of other lands. Un- 
informed attacks on the Federal public 
works programs, can defeat or delay con- 
struction at a critical midpoint for the 
whole upper Missouri Basin, leaving us 
with reduced rather than expanded eco- 
nomie opportunities and with a static 
economy, rather than the expansion 
which the next stages of development 
would bring. 

Great dams to impound water have 
been constructed or are nearing com- 
pletion. The next step is to make the 
water available for beneficial uses. The 
word “beneficial” is used thoughtfully 
for, as I shall show out of our past ex- 
perience, water provided to agriculture in 
South Dakota expands crops now in 
short supply and livestock production, 
where increases in production are 
needed, and not the production of crops 
already in surplus. 

First, however, I think we should re- 
examine American policy and experience 
in relation to Federal public works, and 
see if they have not had a great deal to 
do with the spectacular rise of our coun- 
try from a primitive wilderness to the 
world’s most productive nation in less 
than two centuries. 

WASHINGTON SIGNED FIRST PUBLIC WORKS BILL} 
SURVEYED ROUTE TO THE WEST 

If George Washington were alive today 
and active in public life, I have no doubt 
that some American journals would refer 
to him as the “father of the pork barrel” 
rather than the “Father of his Country.” 

The first Congress of the United States 
in August 1789 passed a law which made 
the establishment and maintenance of 
lighthouses, buoys, beacons, and public 
piers to assist navigation a Federal re- 
sponsibility. President George Wash- 
ington signed it on August 27, 1789. It 
became 1 Stat. 53—the 53d law of the 
new United States of America. 


CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE 


Discussion started at about the same 
time of a canal linking the Potomac 
River with the Ohio, to open up the new 
western territory for development. 
Shortly after he left the Presidency, Mr. 
Washington identified himself profes- 
sionally with those who believed in Fed- 
eral projects to speed the development 
of the Nation by surveying the route for 
a canal from Cumberland, Md., to the 
Ohio River near Wheeling, W. Va. A 
road instead of a canal was authorized 
on this route in 1806. It was constructed 
during one of the earliest congressional 
debates over Federal responsibility for 
internal improvements. 

If Life magazine had been around at 
that time, it undoubtedly would have 
opposed these “pork barrel” projects— 
the road to the western territory as well 
as Federal assumption of responsibility 
for aids to navigation. There was op- 
position, but the roacl was completed in 
the 1830’s to Vandalia, Ill., at a final 
total cost of $7 million. 

In this early 19th century period, Con- 


~ gress passed and President John Quincy 
,Adams approved the first “omnibus” 


ivers and harbors bill and appropriated 
#arly $2 million for the Chesapeake & 
the Chesapeake & Delaware, the 
Lotisville and Portland, and the Dismal 
Swa canals, 

In $826 and 1827 the Corps of Engi- 
neers were allowed to make surveys for 
railroad$ainder the General Surveys Act 
of 1924, a&hough the act mentioned only 
.canals. The Baltimore & 


Other roads continued 
assistance until 1838, 

isgontinued for a decade. 
the survey work renewed and the 
Army Engineers called upon for 
surveys of rail roti%gs to the Pacific 
Ocean which ultimate#hkbecame the basis 
for the construction of 
nental railroad lines. 


direct Federal public wor 
struction by Federal agencié& 
much of the original survey ’ 
financing of the construction 
eral that they clearly have to 
sidered products of the Federal % 

barrel,” if that term is to be attadk 
to works projects supported by 


US. Government. ” 


A study by the Library of Congress 
shows that 130,401,606 acres of Federal 
public lands were granted to the rail- 
roads to help them finance construction. 
In addition, under the Pacific Railway 
Act of 1862, the Federal Government; is- 
sued bonds to provide cash loans for 
railroad construction at the rate of 
$16,000 per mile for level track, $32,000 
per mile for track in hilly areas, and 
$48,000 per mile for track in mountain- 
ous terrain. The railroads repaid the 
principal and a part of the interest on 
these loans. A Board of Investigation 
and Research in 1945 fixed the Govern- 
ment’s final cost of this financial aid 
to the railroads at $74 billion. 

There was opposition, of course, at 
the time these aids to the railroads were 
being voted, but no one can today deny 
that the speedy development of trans- 


October 7 - 


continental railroad triunsportation ex- 

pedited development cf the Nation and 

that the areas opened by the railroads 

have repaid the Fedcral investment a 

thousand times over. 

The Federal Government has in- 
vested more than $2.6 Lillion in the de- 
velopment of water transportation in the 
Nation dating back to ‘he Act of 1789. 

Since there is alway: the implied or 
direct charge made in connection with 
attacks on public wcrks that such 
projects are ladled cl on a basis of 
political favoritism, } ask unanimous 
consent to have print! in the Recorp 
table, prepared by the Gibrary of Con- 
gress, showing expenditires for naviga- 
tion facilities by States since the incep- 
tion of the program. 

There being no objestion, the table 
was ordered to be printed in the Recorp, 
as follows: 

TaBLe IIl.—Ranking by States of construc- 
tion appropriations though fiseal year 
1960 for new work on 2::isting navigation 
projects under civil works program of 
Corps of Engineers 


. California 
. Kentucky. ____ 115 
. Louisiana. _____ oaee 115 
104 
99 
92 
91 
AMIOrId ah ous eee ed ote 87. 
Alabama, 83 
Massachusetts 79 
Minnesota, 55 
Nebraska 52 
. Virginia ; 49 
. Indiana... 48. 
. Washington u 


. Arkansas_...-------- 2 35. 


Wale eek UO te 24. 


WOWWWONNNNNYNNNNNHE HEE e Yee ee 
APO NE OSL HOANAATEWON KH OOHIADAONHOOMNMAMAR ODE 


. Mississippi__-_.--- 2. 8. 
36. Rhode Island... - 
. Tennessee__.-2-- 0. ek 
8. Oklahoma -_..---- 2. 2 ee 
District of Columbia_ 
MNew Hampshire... _..____ 
41.%¥ermont._...--. 
ho. --_- 


a 
MWOWRADTOONRETNTKEATOCOWHNADOUAAANOOAAROANUMOANNE 


No appigpriations have been made for 
navigation Woscce. in the ‘j1ates of Colorado, 
Montana, Néyada, New Mexico, North Da- 
kota, South Dakota, Utah, and Wyoming. 

Nore 1---This. tabulation is limited to ap- 
propriations for new wa:k under existing 
projects specifically authorized by Congress. 
It excludes appropriations for. superseded 
and abandoned projects. 

Note 2.—-In the table on. ‘iMultiple-purpose 
projects including power."' total appropria- 
tions include about $3438 ntiilion allocable to 
the navigation function. Thus, of total ap- 
propriations of $9,337.2 mlilion for new work 


Sanitized - Approved For Release : CIA-RDP75-00149R0006000401 25-7 


