a 2 


"WORLD OIL COOPERATION OR INTERNATIONAL CHAOS,'' by Walter J. Levy, Foreign 
Affairs, July 1974. 


"NATION'S CHIEF ENVIRONMENTAL ADVISER OFFERS A LONG-RANGE PLAN FOR ENERGY ,"' 
by Russell W. Peterson, Smithsonian, July 1974. 


"OIL, TRADE AND THE DOLLAR," by Lawrence A. Mayer, Fortune, June 1974. 


The three attached articles offer insights into the energy crisis and 
important aspects of it relating to the U.S. The Levy piece appeals for 
worldwide cooperation among oil producers and consumers, a theme we push 
vigorously. We recommend locally appropriate dissemination of the theme 
including replay of article. 


The Peterson article by the chairman of the President's Council on 
Environmental Quality describes the optimistic Half and Half Plan developed 
by the CEQ which assumes that energy savings in this country of 0.7 % per year 
are feasible, and hence calls its projection the Half and Half Plan -- half 
conservation and half growth through exploitation of additional sources of 
energy. 


The Mayer survey of U.S. and other major consuming nations in the first 
phase of the oil crisis finds the U.S. relatively better off than most, and 
reflects that the strength of the free world economic system has been demon- 
strated by its ability to withstand what Levy calls the "'supply shock' of 
the October 1973 embargo and the overall cutback in Arab oil production." 


The Peterson and Mayer articles are intended for background use. 


This issuance contains articles from domestic and foreign 
publications selected for field operational use. Recipients are 
cautioned that most of this material is copyrighted. For repub- 
lication in areas where copyright iriffringement may cause prob- 
lems payment of copyright fees not to exceed $50.00 is authorized 
per previous instructions. The attachment is unclassified when 
detached. 


29 July 1974 


-2Appreved fen Release 1999/09/02 : CIA-RDP79-011944000100570001-3 
emma 


| 


Approved For Release 1999/09/02 : CIA-RDP79-01194A000100570001-3 


WORLD OIL COOPERATION. 
OR INTERNATIONAL CHAOS 
By Walter J. Levy 


ARELY, if ever, in postwar history has the world been 

R confronted with problems as serious as those caused by 

recent changes in the supply and price conditions of the 

world oil trade. To put these changes into proper perspective, 

they must be evaluated not only in economic and financial terms 

but also in the framework of their political and strategic impli- 
cations. i 

I need not dwell here on the overwhelming importance of oil 
for the energy requirements of-every country in the world; nor 
do I plan to elaborate on the fact that—except for the United 
States, the Soviet Union and a small number of countries that are, 
or will become, self-sufficient—most of the nations of the world 
will, at least for the foreseeable future, depend almost entirely on 
imports from a handful of oil-exporting countries, with an over- 
whelming concentration of oil production and reserves in the 
Persian Gulf area of the Middle East. Among those countries in 

- the Gulf, Saudi Arabia is predominant in terms of reserves, pro- 

‘ duction, and most important, in the potential to provide signif- 

icant expansion of supplies. Inevitably, producing decisions by 

Middle East governments, especially Saudi Arabia, will play a 
pivotal role in future world oil availability and pricing. 

Over the last three years or so, oil-producing countries have in 
fact taken over complete control of the oil industry in their coun- 
tries. They have codrdinated their efforts through the Organiza- 
tion of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) which was es- 
tablished in 1960. Since 1970, producing governments have im- 
posed in rapid succession changes in previous agreements that 
had been negotiated and renegotiated with their concession- 
holding companies, predominantly affiliates of the Anglo-Ameri- 
can-international oil companies. These changes were arrived at 
under the threat that if the oil companies would not acquiesce, 
the producing countries would legislate such changes unilaterally 
or expropriate the concessions. In October 1973 the last vestige 
of negotiations was abandoned and producing governments uni- 
laterally set posted prices on their oil. 

In the exercise of this power, Middle East producing countries 
have raised their government oil revenues from taxes and royal- 
ties from about go cents per barrel in 1970 to about $3.00 per 
barrel by October 1973 and then to $7.00 per barrel by January 
1974. In addition, as a result of the participation agreements be- 
tween the producing countries and the oil companies, the gov- 
ernments earn additional income from the sale of their newly 
acquired oil. Its amount, of course, depends on the percent of gov- 
ernment ownership and the price they charge for their oil. Agree- 
ments had been concluded, as recently as late 1972, under which 
producing countries acquired a 25 percent participation in the 


CPYRGHT 


Approved For Release 1999/09/02 : CIA-RDP79-01194A000100570001-3 


Approved For Release 1999/09/02 : CIA-RDP79-01194A000100570001-3 
oil-producing operations and were also committed to sell most of 
their participation oil to the oil companies at agreed-upon prices; ~CPY 
now producing countries are demanding that these arrangements 
be changed in their favor. Only a few arrangements have yet been 
concluded, but most of the producing countries will probably 
insist on at least the equivalent of 60 percent participation and a 
price for the sale of their oi! corresponding to about 93 percent 
of the posted price—both changes most likely to be imposed with 
retroactive effect as of January 1, 1974. On such a basis, the gov- 
ernment income from the total oil-producing operations in key 
countries would average about $9.25 per barrel.’ 

Meanwhile, the oil income of the Middle East producing 
countries has increased from $4 billion in 1970 to $9 billion in 
1972, and to a presently estimated $60 billion in 1974. The oil 
revenues of all OPEC countries are increasing from $15 billion 
in 1972 to nearly $100 billion in 1974. Allowing for all their own 
foreign exchange requirements, OPEC producing countries will 
still have available surplus revenues on the order of $60 billion 
this year alone. And there remains a clear and present danger 
that under conditions as they exist now, the supply of oil from in- 
dividual producing countries or a group of them to individual 

/ importing countries or a group of them might—as in October 

1973-—at a time unknown, again be curtailed or completely cut 
off for a variety of economic, political, strategic, or other reasons. 

The quick pace at'which the producing countries have effected 
this radical shift in the balance of power is perhaps the most dan- 
gerous aspect of the current situation. Whatever the merits of 
their case (of which more later), the world faces frightening re- 
percussions on account of the suddenness with which oil costs of 
importing countries and oil revenues of producing countries have 
been inflated. There just has been no time for mature consider- 
ation by the societies that have to deal with this new exercise of 
oil and financial power, be they recipients or dependents, pro- 
ducers or consumers, 

The security of international oil supply operations is further 
affected by regional conflicts in the producing areas of the Mid- 
die East—in particular the still unresolved issues posed by the 
Israeli-Arab confrontation. There are other potentially danger- 
ous and divisive possibilities, as reflected in Iran’s policy of es- 
tablishing herself as the major strategic power in the Persian 
Gulf and the Indian Ocean. This could, in due course, aggravate 
what is already a latent conflict between Iran and some of the 
Arab countries—not only Iraq, where the hostilities are acute, 
but perhaps even Saudi Arabia. There are also disputes between 
Iraq and Kuwait, unresolved boundary issues between Saudi 
Arabia and Abu Dhabi, and internal conflicts such as the Kurd- 
ish problem in Iraq. Further problems are posed by inherently 
unstable governments in many of these areas and by uncertain 
and unpredictable rules for the succession to power. 

Moreover, within the Persian Gulf area there are varying eco- 
nomic and strategic relationships between some of the producing 
countries and Western powers on the one hand, and the Soviet 
Union and even Communist China—on the other. Moscow 


Approved For Release 1999/09/02 : CIA-RDP79-01194A000100570001-3 


Approved For R _ CIA-R 0001-3 


is deeply involved in Middle East affairs and with the stra- 
egic and national policies of some countries, particularly Iraq 
and Syria. As the producing countries increasingly assert their 
oil and money power, they are also likely to become increasingly. 
involved as hostage or pawn in any major power struggle. 

How can the nations of the world handle this new situation? 
What is the role of the international oil. companies? Above all, 
how can the producing and importing nations avoid a confron- 
tation or simply a series of reciprocal actions that must tend more 
and more toward economic chaos and grave political danger? Is 
there a way to reconcile the various national interests and to 
achieve constructive overall codperation? 


The first key fact that must now be recognized is that the posi- 
tion of the international pil companies has changed completely 
over the past few years. Up to about 1969'the major concession- 
holding companies still could determine levels of production, in- 
vestments, exports and prices. Moreover, they still possessed sub- 
stantial bargaining leverage in their negotiations with producing 
countries, largely by virtue of the surplus producing capacity that 
obtained in the Middle East, and even in the United States into 
the latter sixties. 

; All this has now gone. The producing countries have taken 
over from the companies the power to set production levels, to 
designate or embargo export destinations, to direct investments 
and to set prices. The oil-producing affiliates of the international 
oil companies have become completely subservient to the direc- 
tives issued by the oil-producing countries. Nothing perhaps re- 
flects the present state of affairs more dramatically than the fact 
that American- and Dutch-owned oil companies had no choice 
last fall but to become the instruments for carrying out the em- 
bargo on oil shipments to their own home countries. 

Thus, the companies no longer possess any real leverage. About 
the only role that is, in effect, left to them in established produc- 
ing areas is that of a contractor providing technical services, 
getting in return some privileged access to oil—at costs and 
prices determined by producing governments. The extent of 
even this “privilege” and the time over which it will be avail- 
able are subject to unilateral cancellation at any moment, as were 
all preceding arrangements. 

At the same time that they have been deprived of effective con- 
trol over their producing operations, the role of the international 
oil companies in consuming countries has come under increasing 
fire, fueled also by the recent sudden increase in company profits. 
During the emergency, consuming governments largely ab- 
dicated any effective role; the companies thus had to make far- 
ranging decisions as to allocation of supplies, pricing, treatment 
of nonintegrated companies, and many other issues. Tt was the 
companies that kept sufficient supplies moving to all countries; 
now, after the event, some of their decisions are being challenged 
by consuming governments. It is extremely doubtful whether the 
companies still possess the necessary flexibility:to cope with an- 
other similar crisis. 


* Approved For Release 1999/09/02 : CIA-RDP79-01194A000100570001-3 


| 


Approved For Release 1999/09/02 : CIA-RDP79-01194A000100570001-3 | 


f the role of the major international oil companies ‘in estab- GPYRGHT 
lished producing areas is diminished, it is nonetheless important 
to understand what their remaining position is. The technical 
services they can provide are extensive, and vital to continuing 
development of the producing countries’ resources as well as to 
efficient producing operations. Moreover, none of the producing 
countries is prepared to handle alone the disposition of the huge 
volumes of production they control:, the downstream facilities 
of the majors provide assured outlets for the mainstream of their 
production, while remaining quantities of crude can be sold di- 
rectly or used to support refining and petrochemical production 
in their own countries or in joint ventures abroad. 

Because of their size, scope, technical competence and financial | 
strength, coupled with their important positions in the-produc- 
tion and development of oif, gas, coal, shale, tar sands, and atomic 
resources in areas politically secure, the international oi] com- 
panies are bound to play a major—if not the major—role in ex- 
panding dependable additional sources of energy supplies. Even 
though their foreign crude oil resource base is subject to progres- 
sive erosion, the major internationals will accordingly continue 
to provide for the importing countries over the years ahead the 
most flexible sources of energy supply. | 

However, the international oil companies are no longer able 
to assure the continuity or price of regular supplies to oil-import- | 

| 


ing countries. And while they can hope to maintain continued | 
preferred access to substantial production in support of their | 
affiliates’ crude requirements, even that is uncertain and con- | 
tingent on the producing countries’ self-interest in extending 
such offtake rights. | 

Downstream investment in refining, marketing, and transport | 
thus tends to become extremely risky, because the viability of | 
such investment is predicated on secure supplies. Meanwhile, as 
a logical part of their own development program, ‘producing 
countries are using their control over crude availability to spur 
refining and petrochemical investment in their own countries 
and to acquire tanker fleets—all of which will in due course add 
to consuming countries’ foreign exchange import costs and 
adversely affect the flexibility and security of their supplies. . 

In the circumstances, oil-importing countries can no longer | 
expect the companies to fulfill their earlier most important role, 
as an effective intermediary between the interests of producing 
and consuming countries. Nor can the international oil com- | 
panies function, as in the past, effectively to preclude direct deal- 
ings between importing and producing countries relating to oil 
supplies, prices, etc., which may easily lead to political confron- 
tations. To the extent that the companies maintain their opera- 
tions in producing countries, they in fact reflect the producing 
governments’ economic, political, and Strategic policies. To be 
able to hold on to whatever tenuous residual rights or prefer- 
ences the producing countries might still be willing to extend, | 
the companies will have no choice but to acquiesce in virtually 
any kind of conditions imposed or exacted. 

All this points to a far greater involvement by consuming- 


country governments in oil industry operations than heretofore. 
One major objective will be greater “transparency” in oil com- 

| pany policies. Oil-importing countries cannot be in the dark with 
respect to negotiations in producing areas, when the decisions 
vitally affect the security and price of their essential oil supplies. 
They will want to know more about investment plans and policies 
in their own countries. And with transparency will inevitably 
come progressively more government, interposition throughout 
internal oil economies. 

But here, too, the international oil companies will have a con- 
tinuing role to play. Producing countries will become increas- 
ingly involved downstream, as direct crude sellers and through 
investment. Consuming countries will become increasingly in- 
volved upstream, through various exploration and crude arrange- 
ments. Within this emergiifg fragmentation. of world oil trade, 
‘the integrated facilities of the companies could provide an im- 
portant, perhaps the major, core of efficient operations. 

In sum, whatever arrangements on supply, financing, and 
pricing the oil companies may still be able to conclude formally 
with producing countries, in practice and underlying reality such 
arrangements cannot be ignored by the importing countries but 

| are bound to be decisively affected by their policies. Moreover, 
with the.vital concern the importing countries have not only for 
price but for availability of oil, it now appears inevitable that 
their governments wil! also in due course establish a compre- 
hensive policy of surveillance and consultation—perhaps even 
some measure of control—with regard to oil company operations 
encompassing the whole range of oil activities vitally affecting 
their countries. . 


CPYRGHT 


As the problems of 01] have become matters that in many key 
respects can only be handled directly between governments, so 
their gravity has now become all too clear. Faced with the major 
“supply shock” of the October 1973 oil embargo and the overall 
cutback in Arab oil production, the immediate reaction of prac- 
tically every importing country was to engage in a competitive 
scramble for oil supplies, coupled with offers to adapt its 
Middle East policy to Arab demands, and promises of all kinds 
of financial inducements. It was indeed a humiliating experi- 
ence for historically independent and proud nations. What 
we were witnessing, in fact, was not only the fragmentation of 
the operations of the multinational oil companies, but also the 
polarization of the oil policies of the importing countries, with 
foreign petroleum ministers skillfully influencing individual 
importing countries through the device of handing out oil re- 
wards and punishments. . 

Then, late in 1973, the advance in world oil prices dictated by 
OPEC countries was of such magnitude that practically every 
importing nation was suddenly confronted with major balance- 
of-trade problems of immediate and continuing effect. The cost 
of foreign oil supplies for all importing countries will exceed. 
$100 billion in 1974, compared with some $20 billion in 1972. 
For developing countries alone, it will jump from $5 billion in 


Approved For Release 1999/09/02 : CIA-RDP79-01194A000100570001-3 


Approved For Release 1999/09/02 : CIA-RDP79-01194A000100570001-3 


a 


| 
1973 to $15 billion in 1974—and the $ro-billion increase will | 
exceed all the foreign aid that these countries received in the CPYRGHT 
previous year. Meanwhile, as noted, the OPEC producing © | 
countries will accumulate, during 1974 alone, surplus holdings 
of foreign exchange not needed for their own import require- 
ments of some $60 billion—or nearly two-thirds of the net book 
value of total U.S. private foreign investment. ~ 
Obviously, this surplus accumulation of funds will somehow 
2 be recycled into the world’s monetary system initially, probably 
mainly into the short-term Eurodollar market. But this process 
will not necessarily result in the availability of loans to the vari- 
ous importing countries in accordance with their individual 
foreign exchange needs. The créditworthiness of the borrower 
will decide whether or not Eurodollar loans will be available; 
many of the developing countries and some developed countries 
will not qualify under this criterion. Foreign grants and soft 
loans—some of them probably never to be repaid—will have to 
be miade available, and the Monetary Fund and the World Bank 
are addressing themselves to this problem. I doubt that anything 
like adequate amounts can be made available. 
But the financial oil drainage is nof only a short-term and 
. | passing issue. It will be with us for many, many years—if oil 
prices remain at present levels (or rise as is now occasionally 
threatened), and if the oil-producing countries. themselves are 
not prepared to make favorable loan arrangements to needy 
countries in addition to whatever the developed countries are | 
able and willing to do. To the extent that oil imports are financed | 
by a continued recycling of surplus oil revenues via investments | 
or loans on commercial ‘terms, oil-importing countries will face 
pyramiding interest or individual charges on top of mounting | 
direct oil import costs. | 
Equally if not more disturbing is the question whether or not | 
the producing countries owning already large surplus funds will 
be willing to continue to maintain or to expand their production 
and accumulate financial holdings that might result, in part at 
least, in nothing but paper claims that could not be repaid. If the 
producing countries make direct foreign investments, the bulk 
of such investments will obviously be placed in the advanced 
developed countries, where it would appear to be safest and most 
profitable. That will leave the less-preferred developed coun- 
tries and the developing countries out in the cold. Moreover, the 
scope for such investments owned directly by foreign producing 
governments is likely to be limited. Accordingly, oil-exporting 
countries with surplus revenues might well decide to reduce 
production—to conserve their liquid gold in the ground rather 
than increase potential paper claims above ground. Oil revenue | 
surpluses could thus well conduce to oil supply shortage. 
There are thus valid reasons to fear that even where present 
policies of producing countries provide for expanding oil pro- | 
duction, circumstances might arise where, in what they consider | 
to be their own self-interest or even for any political whim, the © | 
governments involved abruptly cut their level of oil exports. 


Approved For Release 1999/09/02 : CIA-RDP79-01194A000100570001-3 


Approved For Release 1999/09/02 : CIA-RDP79-01194A000100570001-3 
Kuwait, Libya, Abu Dhabi, Ecuador, and Venezuela have al- 


ready announced restrictions in their production. Iran has threat- 
ened to do so if the importers object to price levels. © 

The financial dilemma for oil-importing countries is clear. In 
order to finance oil import costs, they will have to look to - 
progressively expanded foreign investment by, or indebtedness 
to, producing countries. Without any amelioration in the cartel 
prices and payments terms, the alternative for importing coun- 
tries would-be rather severe reductions in oil imports and oil 
consumption. To cut back imports drastically, to levels that could 
be financed out of current income, would hardly be a viable 
solution. The resulting shortfall in total energy, and the economic 
consequences of declines in production, employment and trade, 
would further undercut the oil-importing countries’ ability to 
finance even sharply reduced levels of oil supplies. The contrac- 
tion of energy consumption and economic activity would thus 
become a cumulative spiral. 

In sum, the short- to medium-term implications of-the present 
situation are simply not bearable, either for the oil-importing 
countries—especially the nations already needy—or for the world 
economy as a whole. In the wake of this topsy-turvy winter, © 

- with the Arab oil embargo against the United States now 
lifted, the temptation is momentarily strong to suppose that 
the oil crisis has now genuinely eased. The major industrialized 
countries of the world once again look forward to economic 
growth, though at lower rates, with worldwide balance-of-pay- | 
ments deficits, and with a terrible economic and political prob- 
lem of inflation, to which oil prices have made a substantial con- 
tribution. But the oil balance-of-payments burden is just starting 
and the transfer of funds to oil-producing countries just begin- 
ning. In any case, no significant Jasting relief at all is in sight for 
the needy oil-importing countries. The fact is that the world 
economy—for the sake of everyone—cannot survive in a healthy 
or remotely healthy condition if cartel. pricing and actual or 
threatened supply restraints of oil continue on the trends marked 
out by the new situation. 

As a first step, the insecurity of oil supply and the financial 
problems that have arisen clearly call for a wide-ranging co- 
ordinated program among all importing countries. This was the 
main reason why the American government called for a con- 
ference of the major oil-importing countries in February of this 
year. This codperative effort falls into two basic parts: first, what 
must be done internally by the importing countries; and second, 
what a codrdinated policy should be vis-a-vis producing coun- 
tries. With the oil-producing countries already codéperating 
closely through OPEC, codperation among the oil-importing 
countries is a simple necessity ; properly understood and handled, 
it can be the only way to achieve constructive overall adjust- 
ments, 

Among themselves, the importing countries must first estab- 
lish and coordinate their research and development programs 
with regard to existing and new energy resources. Unnecessary 
and time-consuming duplication m be i 


Approved For Release 1999/09/02 - CIA-RDP79-01194A000100570001-3 


CPYRGHT 


Approved For Release 1999/09/02 : CIA-RDP79-01194A000100570001-3 


and development efforts should be concentrated on those re- CPYRGHT 
sources where optimum results can be expected. The skills avail- 
able for research and the engineering resources that would have 
to be employed, if not pooled, should at least be utilized in ac- | 
cordance with a program for maximum overall efficiency. 

The oil-importing countries must also establish a concurrent 
and consistent program of energy conservation which would pro- 
vide for far greater efficiency in the use of energy resources. Here 
too the research effort and the measures to be taken should be 
coordinated on an international basis. 

Whatever the course of foreign oil prices, policies to conserve 
consumption and to spur the development of alternative energy 
sources will remain relevant for the future. Moreover, a high 
degree of government involvement is essential to the success of 
such efforts—including the‘probable necessity of government 
guarantees putting a floor under the selling price of alternative 
energy sources. For if—as we shall see later—there is a chance 
that foreign oil prices will fall, then private interests working ~ 
on projects for tar sands, shale, gasification of coal and'the like, — 
will not be willing or able to continue their efforts. If a major 
effort to develop alternative energy resources is to be sustained, 
‘particularly in North America, the criterion cannot be orthodox 
economic soundness weighing the price of alternative energy 
against the actual (or predicted) price of foreign oil. Rather, 
the decisive criterion must be the price to which foreign oil 
could and would rise if the alternative energy supplies were not 
forthcoming. The public interest in avoiding dependence on 
foreign oil dictates public support and a substantial measure of 
price guarantees by individual countries, notably the United 
States but perhaps others as well, again acting in codrdination. | 

Thirdly, the major importing countries must be able to agree | 
on a problem that has so far eluded their efforts—that of ade- 

quate stockpiling and burden-sharing. On stockpiling, no im- 
porting nation should now have on hand perhaps less than a 
supply equal to six months of its imports. And there must be clear 
contingency plans for restrained consumption and for sharing 
if oil supplies are again cut off or curtailed—whether for politi- | 
cal or economic reasons. Remaining oil imports must be parceled 
out according to some formula based not on the previous per- / 
centage of imports from the sources cut off, but on the basis | 
largely of need—so that those fortunate enough to possess sub- 
stantial national energy resources would have the smallest, if | 
any, claim on the oil still flowing. Beyond that, I do not believe 
it would be politically feasible to establish rules that would 
require countries able domestically just to cover their minimum 
requirements to export some of their domestic energy supplies to 
a less fortunate country. 

Moreover, oil-importing countries must abstain from trying 
to resolve their balance-of-trade problems by unduly pushing 
their general exports to other oil-importing countries or by re- | 
stricting their imports from them. Such policies would only 
aggravate the problems of these other countries. Competitive 
devaluation of currencies or inflation of export prices would be 


Approved For Release 1999/09/02 : CIA-RDP79-01194A000100570001-3 


Approved For Release 1999/09/02 : CIA-RDP79-01194A000100570001-3 


self-defeating, since the oil-producing countries clearly intend CPYRGHT 
to adjust the level of oil prices in accordance with an index of 
currency values as well as the cost of manufactured goods and 
other commodities in world trade. The oil-importing countries 
may have to act in many other ways in order to avoid such dan- 
gerous repercussions as sévere deflation and unemployment. To 
deal with the situation will require an unprecedented degree of 
‘self-restraint, prudent economic management and political so- 
phistication and wisdom. Past experience suggests extreme skep- 
ticism that the countries will in fact consistently follow such 
policies. But if they do not, the consequences for all of them 
could become very serjous indeed. 

Bilateral transactions between oil-importing and producing 
countries or. their respective companies will inevitably be of 
growing importance, But in concluding such deals the importing 
countries must abstain from trying to obtain unilateral advan- 
tages—by making arrangements for oil imports that would tend 
to pre¢mpt sources of supply through discriminatory. practices, 
or by transactions designed to tie up for themselves an excessive 
part of the import capacity of the oil-producing country. They 
must also resist the temptation to offset their oil deficits by the 

" competitive rearming of the various Middle East countries, a 
practice bound in the end to produce a military disaster for all. 

So much for the minimum initial requirements for coéperation 
among the major oil-importing countries. A measure of common 
appreciation does now exist for most of these “headings of co- 
operation” by at least a large majority of the relevant importing 
countries, although they have yet to be fleshed out by practical 
working arrangements‘or adequate guidelines for national be- 
havior. 

The hardest questions remain. Even if coéperation is achieved 
in all these respects, can it serve to do more than shorten the 
period of extreme vulnerability and cushion the impact of con- 
tinued one-sided decisions by the OPEC countries? Is consumer 
cooperation truly adequate if it does not address itself to the key 
questions of price and supply? 

I believe the answer to both questions is in the negative. When 
the brewing crisis came to a head last fall, the initial reaction of 
many importing countries was to try unilaterally to take care of 
themselves for both economic and strategic reasons—through 
barter arrangements, major investment offers to various produc- 
ing countries, even in some cases extravagant arms supply deals. 
This tendency was an understandable reaction in the first phase 
of the new crisis, and indeed a continuing degree of individual 
national initiatives is not only inevitable, but can be healthy in 
some respects, in providing an infusion of economic and political 
alternatives into the changing relationships between oil-import- 
ing and oil-producing countries. 

Already, however, the limits of the individual approach are 
obvious. Even for the most aggressive of the oil-importing na- 
tions, it has not worked effectively; they find themselves with very 
large obligations in return for very small increments of favorable 
treatment, or for nothing more concrete than a generalized 


Approved For Release 1999/09/02 : CIA-RDP79-01194A000100570001-3 


ise for the future. Moreover, where there have been specific . 
deals, these are as much subject to abrogation or revision as the 

basic arrangements themselves. “What have. you done for me 

lately?” is not a question confined to the dialogue between pol-, 
iticians and voters. . | : 

Moreover, precipitate attempts by individual countries to go 
it alone can only obscure the nature of the problem, which 1s 
basically a common one that engages not only the interests of all 
the importing countries but the interests of the producers in a 
viable world economy and in their own regional and national 
political stability. The producers are bound not to see the prob- 
lem in this light if one importing country after another posits 
this arrangement or that as its own selfish modus vivendi. And 
to defer attempts at resolution of the common payments problem 
while individual initiatives are being exhausted is bound to make 
eventual general agreement moye difficult, because so many in- 
consistent cards will have been played. : 

Thus, it is my conviction that a constructive accommodation 
between the interests of producers and importers, enabling the 
latter to pay for and finance adequate oil imports, is possible only 
if the importing countries share a common appreciation of the 
need for a price adjustment as well as for the establishment of 
financial mechanisms to this end. Just as far-reaching coOpera- 
tion among the producing countries has brought about the present 
situation, so a similar codperation among the importing coun- 
tries is now an essential prerequisite to a balanced solution. Only 
if the major importing nations act to codrdinate their policy can 
they expect to be able to present the supply and financial prob- 
lems they are facing in.an effective manner—and to make clear 
the implications of these problems for the producers themselves. 
Moreover, only then could they impress upon at least the relevant 
producing countries what I believe are the two central elements 
in a satisfactory long-term arrangement—some downward ad- 
justment in the level of foreign crude oil prices to all consumers, . 
and specific relief, including long-term deferment of payments, 
for the neediest of the oil-importing countries. 


If coéperation among oil-importing countries is essential to 


the development of constructive cod 
countries, so too is a full and fair unde 
of the case of the producing countri 
were presented vividly in last July’s 
Jahangir Amuzegar of Tran; these p 
been developed in a series of public st 
of producing countries. Nonetheless i 
elements that enter into the attitude 
explore. the validity of their argum 
clear picture of what their long-term 


peration with producing 
rstanding by the importers 
es. Many of its key points 
issue of Foreign Affairs by 
oints and others have since 
atements by various leaders 
t helps to go over the main 
s of the producers, and to 


ents, seeking to arrive at a 
interests are, 


Approved For Release 1999/09/02 : CIA-RDP79-01194A000100570001-3 


we Fete me ee a i 


Approved For Release 1999/09/02 : CIA-RDP79-01194A000100570001-3 


A major goal of producing countries is rapid and consistent . 
progress in their economic development so that they can become CPYRGHT 
economically viable and secure by the time their oil reserves 
peter out. In the meantime, the pace of their industrial progress 
depends largely on the size of their oil revenues, and the level 
of oil prices is of decisive importance for their present and future 
prosperity. 12) 

The producing countries also cite additional reasons to justify 
the huge price increases that they imposed in the course of 1973. 
The large increase in oil prices, they say, is warranted by the 
alternative cost that would have to be incurred if oil had to be 
replaced by other energy sources such as shale oil, oil from tar 
sands, etc. Even though there is currently still a surplus of poten- — 
tial oil supplies, oil reserves may well be exhausted in- perhaps 20 | 
to 30 years. But in a free competitive market, prices would not, : 
at this time, reflect future shortages of supply and would thus 
provide no encouragement for the development of substitutes. 
Accordingly, the oil-producing countries say that high oil pricés 
are now necessary so that research and development programs 
for new energy sources will be promptly initiated. Otherwise, 
with the long lead time required, energy would be in short supply 
when world oil production begins to decline. 

Also, so they argue, high oil prices now will result in oil con- 
servation and encourage the use of oil for the most essential and 
valuable purposes where it cannot be so easily replaced, such as 
for petrochemical production. The highest-value use, they main- 
tain, should in practice be the basis for oil pricing. con 

The producing countries also assert that the high current oil 
prices redress the injustice of too low a level of prices in the past, 
when oi! prices had fallen behind those of manufactured goods 
and food which the oil-producing countries had to “import. 

- Relatively low oil prices in the past have, they maintain, un- 
duly enriched the developed countries at their expense. (What- 
ever the degree of validity of this argument for past periods, it 
should be noted that the increase in oil prices between 1970 and 
January 1974 has, according to a United Nations analysis, 
amounted to 480 percent and was extraordinarily larger than 
that of practically any other commodity. The share of petroleum 
in world imports of about $316 billion during 1970—the last 
year for which detailed statistics are available—amounted to 
about 7.7 percent; at January 1974 commodity prices, the value 
of 1970 imports would have increased to $618 billion, of which 
petroleum would have accounted for as much as 23 percent.) 

Oil-producing countries are aware that high oil prices may 
harm the progress of other developing countries. But primary 
responsibility for economic assistance, so they postulate, rests 
on the rich developed countries. And even though oil-producing 
countries maintain that in development terms they are still poor, 
they have stated that they, too, will make a substantial contribu- 
tion to support developing countries, and a number of them have 
indeed done so. In addition, they will endeavor to convince other 
Taw-material-producing developing countries that the 

butdTmIprove their economic position substantially if they 


Approved For Release 1999/09/02 : CIA-RDP79-01194A000100570001-3 


| r 


Approved For Release 1999/09/02 : CIA-RDP79-01194A000100570001-3 


y 
The producing countries also complain that in the past they CPYRGHT ’ 
have been deprived of economic development based on their oil 
resources, such as refineries, petrochemical plants, tankers, and 
energy-intensive industries. ‘Instead, enormous quantities of gas | 
have been flared. Accordingly, it is a basic part of their develop-: 
ment policy that investment in local petroleum-processing plants 
should be undertaken on a large scale within the oil-producing 
countries, and that they should participate far more in the whole 
operation of the transportation and exporting of oil. 
Obviously, there is substantial merit in many of the points now 
so forcefully advanced by the oil-producing countries—and it is © 
no effective answer to point out that Western initiative was 
largely responsible both for. the discovery of oil and for the de- 
velopment of its manifold | uses. The major oil- -importing nations, 
in particular, must give heed to the legitimate grievances and 
aspirations of the oil producers. Be F 
On the other hand, the producing countries cannot continue | 
to take the position that the economic situation of the major im- 
porting countries is no concern of theirs. It is one thing to adjust 
oil prices to the real or imagined wrongs of the past, another to 
- | carry that adjustment to the point of jeopardizing the future 
‘ economic, political, and strategic viability of importing coun- 
tries. For if this happens, the viability of the producing coun- 
tries themselves must surely be affected over the years to come. 

There is thus no alternative for the importing countries but to 
try to convince the producing countries that there must be respon- 
sible accommodation between the interests of importing and 
producing countries. In order to carry conviction, it is essential 
that there be basic unity among importing countries about the | 
underlying assessments and their policy goals. In the light of the 
extremely sensitive relationship between consuming and produc- | 
ing countries, a contrary position of one or two major importing 
countries would tend to destroy the effectiveness of this approach. 
It would also further strengthen the producing countries in the 
sense.of power that they believe they hold over importing coun- 
tries, and would encourage them to conclude that they could 
effectively maintain their internal as well as external security in 
the face of evolving world chaos. 

In actual fact, however, many producing countries, in spite of 
the extraordinary concentration of oil and money resources in 
their hands, are as yet quite fragile entities, without substantial | 
strategic and military strength in world affairs. They have been 
able to assert themselves because of the disunity among, and 
unwillingness of, importing countries to take any firm position 
vis-a-vis the producing nations. Whatever the concern of pro- 
ducing countries and companies in the pivotal transition from 
surplus producing capacity to tightness of world oi] supplies, the 
oil-importing countries were largely complaisant about the 
course of events. Now, unrestrained exercise of their oil and 
money power by producing countries presupposes that the im- 
porting countries will continue to acquiesce and remain pas- 
sive, even if the world’s economic and political stability is at | 


Approved For Release 1999/09/02 : CIA-RDP79-01194A000100570001-3 


Approved For Release 1999/09/02 : CIA-RDP79-01194A000100570001-3 


Stake. This cannot be a safe basis upon which the producing 
ountries could proceed. If the worst is to be avoided, the pro- 
ducing countries must be made to recognize the danger of pur- 
suing such a course. poe 

There is also the danger that this concentration of oil and 
money resources would tempt the Soviet Union to make use of 
fundamentally weak and socially unstable producing countries—_ 
by proxy, so to speak—in order to undermine the economic and 
political stability of the non-Communist world. Soviet adven- 
turism cannot be ignored, especially the application of Soviet 
power through controls over certain governments such as those 
of Iraq or Syria, as well as by internal threats through Soviet 
support of subversive opposition to governments. There exists, in 
practically every one of these countries, the potential for sudden 
revolutions by extreme elements. 

All of these factors are clearly known fo the various dynasties 
and national governments. Most of them must have inevitably 
reached the conclusion that their hold on power, whjch is some- 
times tenuous, depends in the final analysis on a satisfactory re- 
Jationship with the non-Communist world. We are all interested 
in the maintenance of a peaceful cohesion among Middle East 
countries. But they must recognize that if this cohesion is mainly 
4 used to enable them to enforce their will on the rest of the world 

through the use of oil and money power, they would not only 
undermine the position and strength of the importing countries 
but would also expose their governments and nations to extreme 
risks. 

The oil-exporting countries must be aware that their own inde- 
pendence could not safely be assured if the United States and its 
allies were to be fatally weakened vis-a-vis the Soviet Union. It 
would not be in their self-interest to refuse to supply the vital 
oil needs of the world or to insist on an unmanageable level of 
prices, and risk the economic, political, and strategic conse- 
quences of such policies. 


CPYRGHT 


VI 


So far I have been making the case for unprecedented codp 
eration among the oi!-importing nations, and for much greate 
understanding by both producing and importing countries of 
each other’s needs and of the common interests that affect bot 
groups. If reason alone controlled human affairs, one might con 
clude that a satisfactory solution was possible from greater un 
derstanding alone. 

Unfortunately, that is not the case. One must in the end come 
back to the harsh economics of the energy situation worldwide 
and of the rapidly rising trends in oil consumption that havs 
lain at the root of the present crisis. For it is these trends essen 
tially—far outstripping the growth of indigenous energy source} 
—that have made the oil of the OPEC countries, especially 1 
the Middle East, so vital to practically every nation of the world} 
and have thus given the OPEC countries the bargaining leverag¢ 
to establish the present unilaterally controlled price and suppl 


Approved For Release 1999/09/02 : CIA-RDP79-01194A000100570001-3 


Approved For Release 1999/09/02 : CIA-RDP79-01194A000100570001-3 


situation. With all the understanding and sympathy in the world, © 
the producing countries cannot be expected not to use a bargain- CPYRGHT 
ing position as strong as the present one of OPEC and its Middle 
East members. In last July’s Foreign Affairs, Carroll Wilson 
argued that the United States would be placed in an intolerable « ° 
state of dependence on Middle East oil if it did not develop other 
sources of energy to the maximum and at the same time curtail 
the rate of growth of its energy consumption from 4.5 percent to 

a suggested three percent. Essentially the same analysis must now 

be applied to the oil-importing nations as a whole, not for the sake 

of eliminating a critical degree of dependence on the Middle 
-East—for that is simply not in the cards at least for the rest of this 
decade—but for the sake of containing thereafter the problems 

of oil supply and finance and of establishing now an acceptable _ 
degree of balance in the bargaining positions of producers and 
consumers of oil. ; 

The starting point should be the period from 1968 through 
1972, when energy consumption in the non-Communist world 
as a whole increased at 5.6 percent per year, and oil consumption | 
by 7.5 percent per year. The result was that Middle East oil pro- 

- duction went up by an average of 12.5 percent per year. 

Now the prospect for the period from now until 1980 is for a 
substantial expansion in non-oil energy sources and in oil produc- 
tion within the major oil-consuming countries. Yet it remains 
as clear as it was a. year ago that no drastic technological break- 
through is in sight at least in this time frame. We are still talking 
about natural gas, coal, hydroelectric power and nuclear fission 
as the primary alternatives to oil—and one need hardly add that 
even substantial increases in some of these are still fraught with 
difficulty. 

In response to the new situation, it is already reasonable to 
postulate some conservation at the margin in response to higher 
energy costs. Given the dynamic energy needs of Japan, the 
developing countries, and to a lesser extent Western Europe, 
however, it is difficult to see that “conservation at the margin” 
will in itself produce a dramatic drop in the growth of energy 
needs. Supposing, for example, energy consumption grew at 
only 4.6 percent per year instead of the 5.6 percent of the 1968- 
72 period, the picture might look something like this: - = 4 


1972. 1975 1980 5972-1980 
(Millions of Barrels (Average Annual 
Daily Oil Equivalent) Percentage Growth) 
Primary Energy Demand _ 80 115 4.6 
From Non-Oil Sources 35° 48 oy 40 © 
Oi Consumption __ ms 45 ns 5.1 
Indigenous Oil Production 18 27 5.2 
Oi) Imports 27 40 5.0 
Needed from the Middle East 18 29 6.3" 


Approved For Release 1999/09/02 : CIA-RDP79-01194A000100570001-3 | 


Approved For Release 1999/09/02 : CIA-RDP79-01194A000100570001-3 
Obviously, this is a broad-brush projection. But it is enough, 
I believe, to demonstrate two fundamental conclusions: (1) that |CPYRGHT 
even at current prices this rate of oil imports could not be sus- 
tained by the oil-importing countries on a current payments 
basis; (2) that with production increases fairly well spread 
among the producing countries, none would be under any pres- 
sure to lower prices or to increase production further. (This is a 
modest conclusion; actually the pressure would be greater for 
production cutbacks than for increases. The oil simply might 
not be forthcoming.) In short, mere “conservation at the margin” 
—itself more than many governments are now asking of their 
people—will neither avoid economic calamity nor provide a 
balanced situation vis-a-vis the: producers. 
To get these essential results I believe we shall have to go con- 
siderably further. Again fér illustrative purposes, let us see what | 
the situation would be if the oil-importing countries could man- | 
age genuine austerity in their use of energy, cutting their growth | 
rate to, say, 3.3 percent. (The reduced U.S. growth rate would | 
have to be less than this; with all U.S. energy waste, it would 
still involve a major change in habits and ways. For Japan and 
the developing countries, the impact on production growth 
would be far more severe. In short, this kind of reduced rate of 
a increase does deserve to be called austerity.) In such a case, using 
the same assumptions for non-oil sources and indigenous oil pro- 
duction, a revised table would look like this: 
1972 1975 1980 1972-1980 
(Millions of Barrels | (Average Annual 
Daily Oil Equivalent) Percentage Growth) 
Primary Energy Demand 80... 104 43: 
Oil Consumption 45, 560 2.7 
Oil Imports 27 29 0.8 
Needed from the Middle East 18 18 O.1 


This level of austerity would, I believe, be just adequate to 
permit the major industrialized nations to maintain viable eco-| 
nomic and industrial operations, including continued growth but 
at a lower rate than might have been projected on the basis of 
previous oil prices and supply availability. Even then, most of 
the oil-importing countries would, at least until the latter part] 
of this decade, be exposed to a very substantial and—in the case 
of some countries—nearly unmanageable financial burden. In 
short, while the deliberate initiation of such austerity would 
require an act of political will far exceeding what is actually 
happening in most importing countries, the choice will in the 
end be compelled by financial pressures. The longer it is put off 
the worse it will get. . | 

Once undertaken, this austerity policy could in time achieve 
some trade balance between the producing and consuming coun- 
tries. In particular, the huge annual accumulation of surplus 
funds by Middle East producing countries would start to decline 
about 1978 and would reach manageable proportions shortl 
thereafter. Put differently, the importing countries would in 


Approved For Release 1999/09/02 : CIA-RDP79-01194A000100570001-3 


Approved For Release 1999/09/02 : CIA-RDP79-01194A000100570001-3 


aggregate terms be able to pay for their oil by a steadily increased | cpyRGHT 
flow of goods and services to the producers. At the same time, © 
however, since the ability of the importing countries to supply 
goods and services is concentrated in only a handful of them, the 
financial burden of oil imports would vary greatly, remaining 
very substantial for the Jess-industrialized developed countries 
and especially for the developing countries: which are net con- 
sumers of oil. Thus, it would remain essential to have financial 
mechanisms and arrangements that would cushion this differ- 
ential impact and make it bearable. 

Turn now to the situation of the oil exporters. The second table 
suggests that their total exports would level off and then start to 
decline slightly by the end of the decade, asthe importing coun- 
tries managed to increase thejr non-oil sources of energy and as 
indigenous oil sources were tapped more fully (principally the 
North Sea and the North Slope in Alaska). The table also as- 
sumes that oil producers outside the Middle East will increase 
their total capacity somewhat, and will be motivated to produce 
at maximum attainable levels—since practically all of these na- 
tions need their oil revenues for immediate development pur- 
poses. Thus, the total demand on the Middle East-would tend to 
decline by the end of the decade. . | 

This is not to suggest for a moment that the Middle East oil 
producers would then: be in difficulty. They would still be sup- 
plying more than 60 percent of the oil moving in world trade, 
and Middle East oil would remain vital to Japan, Western 
Europe, and the developing nations—in an austerity situation, 
any further cuts would reach the bone more rapidly than in the 
Present somewhat “soft” situation. In short, the Middle East 
producing countries as a group would remain in a strong position. 

At the same time, the production levels of individual countries 
in the Middle East would be placed seriously in question. Kuwait 

(like Libya in North Africa) is already pursuing policies de- 
signed to conserve its oil reserves and thus to stabilize output | 
below previously attained levels of production. On the other | 
hand, Iran and Iraq look to increase their production very sub- 
stantially from present totals of roughly eight million barrels a 
day to 12-13 million barrels per day. If these trends were to con- 
tinue, and if the need for Middle East oil were to level off at 18 
million or so barrels per day, it is evident that the remaining 
suppliers—especially Saudi Arabia and Abu Dhabi which had 
previously benefited from oil revenues far in excess of their 
development needs—would then have to accept a drastic reduc- 
tion in their levels of production, or alternatively to seek to in- 
crease their output by reducing their prices (and thus giving 
consumers an incentive to ease up on their austerity). 

It is an open question, which of course cannot be analytically 
resolved, whether in the light of these circumstances the various 
Middle East producing countries would decide to “fight it out” 
among themselves by competing for exports through price reduc- 
tions. They might seek to go in the opposite direction, to enter 
into a production and export control agreement under which 
they would rearrange their respective production and export | 


Approved For Release 1999/09/02 : CIA-RDP79-01194A000100570001-3 


Approved For Release 1999/09/02 : CIA-RDP79-01194A000100570001-3 


levels. At the same time, they might try to increase their prices 
and tax takes so as to provide for the needs of those Middle East CPYRGHT 
countries that would have to reduce some of their previously. 
duction. On a rational basis, the latter course 
ny price and tax reductions would tend 
d as well, so that the Middle East as a 
ra higher level 
of prod 
2 In trying to assess what under such con 
countries might actually decide to do, we must think not only or 
even mainly in economic terms, nor draw only on past experience 
with regard to the cbhesiveness of private cartels in similar cir- 
cumstances. At most, the economic facts of supply and demand 
frame the problem; it will, still be decided by national govern- 
ments in the producing countries, and their policies are likely 
to be governed by an extraordinary combjnation of political and 
strategic as well as economic factors. ne 
- On the basis of such a broad assessment, the short-ferm argu- 
ment for controlling production and maintaining or further 
raising prices and tax takes must encounter a growing awareness 
| of wider relevant considerations. For such a course—in effect 
. responding to consumer austerity by higher producer prices— 
would surely leave the importing countries with even worse 
financial problems than are now in prospect. Even more heavily 
than now, the burden of paying for restrained but more expensive 
oil imports would fall upon lagging economies suffering from 
extremely serious financial problems. Even more than now, the 
producing countries would have to ask themselves whether they 
could expect to remain islands of prosperity in a worldwide de- 
pression, or of political stability when the will and ability of 
strategically powerful nations to support them had been eroded. 


To sum up, four elements are essential to move to a reasonable 
adjustment: far-reaching codperation among the oil-importing 
nations, an understanding by the importing nations of the inter- 
ests and aspirations of the producing countries, a clear-cut (and 
painful) program of energy austerity by the oil-importing coun- 
tries, and a recognition by the producing countries that even in 
an austerity situation any attempt to hold prices high must result 
in worldwide dangers to which they could not be immune. Only 
with far-reaching consumer cooperation can it be expected that 
the producing countries will come to this necessary conclusion; 
at the same time codperation without austerity will not do the 
job. Both are needed, and a large new dose of political will, not 
yet in sight, will be required to achieve them. 

The key to a reasonable solution is time: to make the finan- 
cial burdens on all oil-importing countries tolerable and to 
bridge the gap until the day, not too far distant, when the pro- 
ducing countries, at least in the aggregate, will have reached the 
point where they can be paid in goods and services—and where 
they will have joined, for practical purposes, the ranks of the 
developed nations. 

And the basis for such an adjustment, in turn, is the acceptance 


Approved For Release 1999/09/02 : CIA-RDP79-01194A000100570001-3 


but must be based on a mutual accommodation of interests or, as 
the United Nations Declaration on the Establishment of a New 
International Economic Order puts it, on an appreciation of 
“the reality of interdependence of all the members of the world 
community.” Otherwise it will be destructive to all. 

Such a principle is not, of course, confined to the case of oil. 
The April meeting of the United Nations General Assembly, 
and the United Nations reports prepared for it, have underlined 
the degree to which the rise in food and fertilizer prices over the 
past two years—created in these cases by market forces in com- 
bination with national domestic agricultural policies—have 
damaged the interests of the needy developing countries in par- 
ticular. The United States especially has it in its power to adopt 
measures that would ease the actual cost of food supplies to this 
group of countries; one suggestion would be that the United 
States provide grain and other crucial food to needy-countries 
on concessionary terms or through the application of PL 480 
funds. A similar move might be undertaken by the major coun- 

- tries that export fertilizer. Now, as preparations are underway 
for a World Food Conference in the fall, such moves would be 
even more in order, based on the continued operation of market 
forces for most consumers but with measures to cushion the im- 
pact on needy countries. 

Oil remains the bigest and most difficult case. Since 1970 the 
price and availability of oil moving in world trade have been 
determined progressively by the OPEC countries unilaterally, 
to the point where the present situation effectively is. one of 
price imposed by a cartel. Completely free market prices for 
traded oil are not a practical alternative; in a free market the 
existence of large reserves and the very low cost of developing 
and producing such oil would mean a market price that would 
be very low indeed. Such a price would not be acceptable to 
producing countries—since it would not provide them with the 
budgetary and foreign exchange revenue badly needed for their 
economic development. Nor would it in fact serve the interests 
of importing countries as a whole—since it would lead to waste-] 
ful consumption of oil on the one hand, and on the other would 
provide no inducement to the major countries to push forward 
in good time with research and development on new and more 
costly energy resources which will be needed even more once 
readily available supplies of oil begin to stagnate or decline. 

Accordingly, the price of oil moving in world trade is bound 
to be a kind of administered price, not necessarily negotiated 


Approved For Release 1999/09/02 : CIA-RDP79-01194A000100570001-3 


Approved For Release 1999/09/02 : CIA-RDP79-01194A000100570001-3 


y between prod 
established in a way that would attempt to accommodate and CPYRGHT 
reconcile the economic and financial interests of both groups. 
In addition, the specific plight of the needy oil-importing coun- 
tries should be provided for, if not through a two-tier pricing 
system, then at least by long-term deferral of payments and easy 
credit terms for loans. | 

In sum, I believe that the world situation would now call for 
solemn undertakings that would assure the essential oil require- 
ments of all the importing countries on terms and conditions that 
are economically and financially sustainable. This should be 
accompanied by measures to deal along the lines proposed with 
the cognate cases of food and fertilizer. At the same time, it 1s 
imperative that all the necessary provisions be made to safeguard 
the essential economic interests of the producing countries into a 
future when their position will inevitably become less strong 
than it is at present. Such a combination of actions would be an 
act of statesmanship in which the oil-producing countries and the 
oil-importing countries could and should join not only for the 
common good, but pernane even more so in their most cogent 
self-interest. 

Today, governments are watching an erosion of the world’s 
oil supply and financial systems, comparable in its potential for 
economic and political disaster to the Great Depression of the 
1930s, as if they were hypnotized into inaction. The time is late, 
the need for action overwhelming. 


Approved For Release 1999/09/02 : CIA-RDP79-01194A000100570001-3 


Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution 


Editor Edward K. Thompson 


Board of Editors Ralph Backlund, Grayce 
Northcross, James K. Page jr., Edwards Park 


Associate Editors David Bourdon, Marlane 
Liddell, Louise Smith, John P. Wiley jr. 


Picture Associate Caroline Despard 


Assistant Editors Dee McRae, Donna 
Reifsnider, Meredith Riegle 


Art Djrection John Beveridge 

Advertising Director Thomas H. Black 

General Manager Joseph J. Bonsignore 
Production Nannie Clay Shanahan 


Business Carey O. Randall 
Circulation-Promotion Director Anne Keating 


Board of Regents 
Smithsonian Institution 

Ex Officio 

Chief Justice of the United States 
Warren E. Burger, Chancellor * 


Vice President of the United States 
Gerald R. Ford 


Appointed by the President of the Senate 
HonorableJ. William Fulbright 
Honorable Henry M. Jackson 
Honorable Hugh Scott 


Appointed by the Speaker of the House 
Honorable George H. Mahon 
Honorable William E. Minshall 
Honorable John J. Rooney 


‘Appointed by a Joint Resolution of Congress 


Mr. John Paul Austin 

Dr. John Nicholas Brown 

Dr. William A. M. Burden 

Dr. Robert F. Goheen 

Dr. Crawford H. Greenewalt 

Dr. Caryl P. Haskins 

Honorable A. Leon Higginbotham jr. 
Mr. Thomas J. Watson jr. 

Mr. James E. Webb 


National Board of the Smithsonian Associates 

Mr. Lewis A. Lapham, Chairman, , 

Mr. Harry Hood Bassett, Mr. John W. Brooks, 

Mr. Richard P. Cooley, Mr. Joseph F. Cullman 3rd. 
Mr. Harry B. Cunningham, Mr. Paul L. Davies, 

Mr. Leonard K. Firestone, Mr. Charles T. Fisher III, 
Mr.G. Keith Funston, Mr. Alfred C. Glassell jr., 
Mrs. David L. Guyer, Mr. Ben W. Heineman, 

Mr. Henry J. Heinz H, Mr. William A. Hewitt, 

Mr. Frank Y, Larkin, Hon. George C. McGhee, 


"Mrs. Robert §. McNamara, Dr. Ruben F Mettler, 
“Mr. Charles M Pigott, Mrs. Malcolm Price, 

“Mr. Francis C. Rooney jr., Mr. Merritt K. Ruddock, 
“Mr. Thomas J. Watson jr., Mr. James O. Wright 


Smithsonian is published monthly by the Smithsonian Associates, 

900 Jefferson Drive, Washington, D.C. 20560. © Smithsonian 
Institution 1974. All rights reserved. Reproduction in whole or in 
part withaut permission is prohibited. Subscription price $10 a year 
in U.S, and pussessions, $11.50 elsewhere. Single copy price $1.00. 
Second class postage paid at Washington, D.C, Editorial offices, 

900 Jefferson Drive, Washington, D.C. 20560. Advertising and 
circulation offices at 420 Lexington Ave., New York, New York 10017. 
Please address all subscription correspondence and change of 

address information to P.O. Box 2606, Greenwich, Conn. 06830 


‘than monkeys, camels, ostriches and giraffes 


By Patrick Ryan 
Approved For Release 1999/09/02 : 


s. DPARPProVed For Release 1999/09/02 :/CIA- RD} 9. 011 4A0001009570001-3 CPYRGHT 


soi sonian 


Volume 5, N umber 4 


Table of Contents 


The view from the castle: Secretary Ripley hails 
successful reintroduction of barn owls to the Castle 


Phenomena, comment and notes: Tales of sharks 
and rabbits; some innovative remedies for 
the control of crime, population and beach erosion 


Letters to the Editor 


A Bicentennial reminder of 200 years ago: 
Colonies choose delegates for a congress - 


Visitors learn in the Portland zoo—but not more 


By Daniel Jack Chasan, photographs by Ralph Morse 


The 19th-century restorer Viollet-le-Duc salvaged 
(ruined, some say) France’s medieval monuments 
By Bern Keating, color photographs by Dmitri Kessel 


Yankee Jonathan, an American sharpie, 
left an indelible mark on Uncle Sam 
By Richard Wolkomir, drawings by Arnold Roth 


In Carrying the Fire, the command roodulg pilot describe 
the long, long ordeal of preparation for the moon 
By Michael Collins 


Eighteenth-century bathing machines brought elegance 
to skinny dipping—for kings and commoners alike 
By Peggy Heinrich and Ray J. Worssam 


Replica of Drake’s famous Golden Hinde, lovingly 
built with ancient tools, prepares to brave the Atlantic 
Text and photographs by Terence Spencer 


Huge Arecibo radio telescope is being reshaped 
to give scientists a more sensitive ear on the universe 


The hunger for coal brings boom times to a depressed 
area—energy-rich Sweetwater County in Wyoming 
By David Snell, photographs by Yale Joel 


’ The chairman of the Council on Environmental Quality 


offers a detailed, long-range plan for U.S. energy 
By Russell W. Peterson 


; ; 
Smithsgnian tours 
Book reviews 


July events at the Smithsonian 


The early bird only catches the wrong train 


CPYRGHT 


Approved For Release 1999/09/02 : CIA-RDP79-01194A000100570001-3 


By Russell W. Peterson 


CPYRGHT 


Nation’s chief environmental adviser. 
offers a long-range plan for energy 


a 


“¢ 7 
How much energy will the United States really 
need in the year 2000? How can we produce 
it with minimal damage to the environment? 


Some people still think the shortage of energy last win- 
ter w4s a fluke, but in truth it was the public’s first 
exposure to a problem which will dominate our na- 
tional life until the end.of the century and beyond. 
Major choices must be made about our energy future, 
and each of us—as voters, consumers, employees, home 
owners—has a stake in and some influence over future 
" Jenergy policy. i 

The most important aspect of that policy is the 
goals we decide to work toward. At the Council on 
Environmental Quality (CEQ) we have developed a 
set of goals which we call the Half and Half Plan—a 
specific and manageable program of energy conserva- 
tion and production, geared to energy needs and en- 
vironmental needs. Like all plans, it involves numbers, 
graphs and projections. But. implicit in the numbers 
and curyes—at the heart of the plan—are the really im- 
portant things: human needs, individual life-styles 
and basic values. ‘ 


To begin with, there is the question of whether our 


nation should seek to Become self-sufficient in energy— 
dependent largely upon our own resources. Some be- 
lieve such independence is neither desirable nor prac- 
tical. I believe it is both. 

The United States, with six percent of the world’s 
population, consumes about a third of the world’s 
energy. In the rest of the world, hundreds of millions 
of people are living on less than $100 a year. Many na- 
tions are trapped by an explosion in their population 
which nullifies efforts to improve their level of eco- 
nomic well-being. Historically, population growth has 


slackened as per capita income has increased. But to 


accomplish economic growth requires raising the use 
of energy. For this reason, if forno others, the United 
States has an obligation to plan its energy future so . 
that energy supplies outside the United States can be 
Hevoted to improving the quality of. life elsewhere 
pround the globe. 

To rely primarily on our energy resources, however, 
does not mean that the economy must squeal-to a pain- 
ful halt or that our comfort and convenience must de- 

rease. Energy use will continue to grow. But the 
question is: How much? What will our society's energy 
emands be in the year 2000? 

Traditionally, future energy demands have been cal- 
culated by projecting current growth rates in con- 
sumption. From 1965 to 1970, energy use per capita 
grew at a rate of more than three percent a year. In 
1972, the Department of Interior began with that and 
projected a total of 192 quadrillion BTUs (British 
Thermal Units) of energy in the year 2000, more than 
two-and-one-half times present consumption. (A quad- 
rillion is a million billion; in the jargon, it is often 
shortened to “quad.”) This projection was an excel- 
lent technical effort, and was representative of a num- 
ber of “high-range” forecasts of that period. But the 
oil embargo changed our perspective. That amount 
of energy production is simply out of the question 
without unacceptable dependence on foreign sources 
or unacceptable damage to our environment. 

What must be understood is that the advertisements 
which read “A nation which runs on oil cannot afford 
to run short” should have read “A nation which runs 
on oil is certain to run short.” Seventy-five percent of 
the U.S. energy today comes from petroleum and nat- 
ural gas. But 1970 was the peak year for domestic 
petroleum production; oil from Alaska and the outer 
continental shelf will merely slow the decline in what 
is available to us. And natural gas supplies are ex- 


Approved For Release 1999/09/02 : CIA-RDP79-01194A000100570001-3 


Approved For Release 1999/09/02 : CIA-RDP79-01194A000100570001-4F YRGHT 


pected to reach their peak shortly. From here on out, 
domestic oil and gas production will be declining at 
the same time that our energy needs will be increasing. 
Hence, to more than double energy, consumption 
while using only our domestic resources would require 
us to quadruple or quintuple present coal production 
in the United States, and to increase nuclear power 
from Jess than one quad today to as much as 60 to 80 
quads by the year 2000. 

Even if we could, we do not want to do that. The 
production and use of energy is the single most im- 
portant cause of environmental degradation—all the 
way from the devastation of lands by surface mining 


and the hazards of deep mining to oil spills, sulfur 


ernissions and other pollution of air and water., ‘To 
«consume 192 quads in the year 2000 would put terrible 
-strains on the environment 
So for many reasons we need a lower goal for total 
energy consumed. The Helf and Half Plan represents 
that—a target of 121 quadrillion BTUs instead of 192 
(see graphs pp. 82, 83). We at CEQ believe this is a 
more desirable goal for the United States. 


Half growth, half conservation 


The Half and Half Plan grew out of analyses of the 
growth in per capita energy consumption since 1947, 
not just during the last few years. Over the longer pe- 
riod the rate of growth in energy consumption per 
capita averaged 1.4 percent. That is lower than the 

' recent three percent rate, but it supported, -over the 
period, a great growth in national affluence. 

Furthermore, the Half and Half Plan assumes that 
one-half of this growth in energy consumption per 
capita can be achieved through energy conservation— 
through reallocation from wasteful uses to ones which 
meet important human needs. To paraphrase Benja- 

smin Franklin, a BTU saved is a BTU earned. Each 
‘BTU saved for one purpose means one more that can 
be put to wise use somewhere else. In a nation that has 
been profligate in using energy, there is plenty of room 
for relatively painless conservation. 

I believe the United States should make it a major 
national objective to make energy savings of 0.7 per- 
cent each year. By the year 2000, conserving at that 
rate will reduce gross energy inputs by 27 quadrillion 
BTUs, more than one-third of our present energy con- 
sumption. By making such savings, only 0.7 percent of 
the overall growth rate of 1.4 percent must be pro- 
vided through additional production of energy. Half 
conservation and half growth—hence, the Half and 
Half Plan. 

The energy savings can be achieved by means with 

_which readers of SMITHSONIAN are familiar: better 
insulation and more energy-conscious architectural 


Approved For Release 1999/09/02 : CIA-RDP79-01194A000100570001-3 


_ sorts of dignitaries pulled up in front of 


design in residential and commercial 
buildings; personal efforts to reduce 
household energy use; more efficient ap- 
pliances; more recycling of materials; 
better land use; more energy-conscious 
design of industrial processes; and, most 
important of all, a more efficient trans- 
portation system. - 

At CEQ we have looked particularly 
closely at thé transportation sector and 
think it would be possible to provide all 
needed transportation services in the | 
year 2000 with 21.6 quads, a small in-|° 
crease above the 17.0 quads we use today. 
Some imay. feel this is heretical (the De- 
partment of ‘the Interior, for example, 
projected 42.7 quads, nearly twice as 
much), but we think it could be done. 


’ 


NET ENERGY CONSUMPTION PER CAPITA 
(in Miltions of BTUs) as : 


500 


1 ha OTA 


Teo 


mmem CEQ 


1870 
Interior Department projection showed 
per capita energy use would rise by 2.5 
percent; CEQ calls for only 0.7 percent. 


Improved mass transit would be an im} 
portant factor, but the major change 
would come through smaller, more effit 
cient cars (see p. 85). It is obvious that 4 
car that gets twice as many miles per gal 
lon uses half as rauch gas. (It also cuts si 
pollution.) If, over the next decade, wi 
adopt a new ethic about what constitutes 
a desirable automobile, we can provid 
for universal auto ownership in the a 
2000 and still consume little more gaso; 
line than we do now. 

Of course, many Americans have deep; 
seated feelings about cars; many still be, 
lieve a big car is an important sign of 
success. A few months ago I went to 4 
meeting at the State Department. All 


CPYRGHT 


she building in HMPPrOvES For Release dpwa/QR Oa adel Aebii 68-071 S4AGOGSRGSY DR Segabie cost. A 


arrived in CEQ’s Pinto, we were waved 
away by the doorman. Clearly a member 
of the establishment would not be found 
| in such a car! J had to park a few blocks 
away and walk to the meeting. The point 
| is that we are going to have to change 
our attitudes about some things. But 
we've done it before. People were de- 
lighted with the black Model T before 
color, fins, accessories and yearly model 
| changes appeared. 


. Hope from new technology 


Even if such conservation is achieved, 
even if half of our 1.4 percent growth rate 
is accomplished by energy saving, a great 
deal of energy will still need to be pro- 
duced. The question is: How can it be 
done in the face of dwindling supplies of 
oil and natural gas? 

Many people have high hopes for new 
technologies such as solar energy, geo 
thermal energy and nuclear fusion. I sup- 
port an aggressive pursuit of these tech- 
nologies, but it takes wishful thinking to 
expect that more“than three percent of 
our total energy will come from such 
sources by the year 2000. 

Nuclear fusion as a source of energy 

“still faces many unknowns. Even with 

“-qnajor breakthroughs in fusion research 
(and these are by no means certain to 
occur), we cannot expect any significant 
production from commercial fusion pow- 
er plants by the year 2000. 

Solar energy is now quite properly be- 
ing pushed very hard, Its main applica- 
tion will be to heat and cool buildings. 
But solar energy will be used almost ex- 
clusively on new buildings—few old ones 

~-will beretrofitted—and it will be of lim- 
ited use.in the high-density urban dwell- 
ings-which constitute a steadily larger 

percentage of new home construction. 

Once you do the arithmetic, you have to 

- conclude that solar energy appears un- 
likely to ‘contribute more than one per- 
cent of our energy in the year 2000. 

“The story is similar for geothermal} en- 

ergy, for it can supply no more than two 

percent of our electricity needs by the 
turn of the century. 


‘Therefore, even if energy from the 
Farth’s heat, the sun’s radiation and the 
_ fusion reaction ‘are pushed along as fast 
and as far as possible (as they should be), 
they.simply cannot solve our basic prob- 
lem in the next 25 years, and we are left, 
inescapably, with the alternatives of coal 
and nuclear fission.” 
The United States has the world’s larg- 


vanced nuclear technology. Both sources 
also have severe environmental problems 
associated with them, as SMITHSONIAN 
readers are well aware. Yet environmen- 
talists must realize that when they oppose 
a particular solution to a basic social 
need, they must have an alternative. At 
present, these are the only alternatives in 
sight, so it behooves us to establish and 
enforce the proper environmental regula- 
tions for both of these sources. 

With coal, how to mine it is the first 


GROSS ENERGY CONSUMPTION 
(in Quadrittions of BTU 8) 


BO wearyenaess es Th eae 
BA co 


_ Mamee-CES 


Estimate by Interior called for a total 
of 192 quadrillion BTUs in the year 2000. 
Halt and Half plan requires but 121. 


problem. Everyone has seen pictures of 
the ravages of strip mining, but not every- 
one knows that strip-mined lands—with 
the exception of relatively arid lands— 


ELECTRICITY USE 
(In Miltions of BTUs) 


a. 
» PE pos 
* CEQ 


« NILE CONVERSION LOSSES. 


Greater use of coal and nuclear fission 
means far more energy consumed in form 
of electricity, entailing large losses in 


study CEQ did a year ago showed that 
full restoration for Appalachian strip 
mines was achievable for about three to 
nine percent of the value of the extracted 
coal. As the value of coal rises, that per- 
centage becomes even smaller. We must 
insist on full restoration. 

Deep mining is environmentally less 
damaging but is extremely hazardous to 
the miners. Many coal companies have a 
horrible record im protecting the health 
and safety of the men underground, but 
others have good records. We need to de- 
velop new mining technologies and insist 
‘on the best safety practices. 

However it is mined, we must burn . 
coal in a way that minimizes the threat to 


our health from emissions of sulfur 


oxides. Fortunately, about half of our 
coal has low sulfur content; this should 
be aHocated to densely populated areas. 
Furthermore, we must refine technologies 
for removing sulfur from coal. In Japan, 
stack gas scrubbers have worked success- 
fully. And by the mid-1980s we can be 
converting coal to gas, extracting the sul- 
fur in the conversion process and then 
piping the gas to individual homes for 
heating and cooling. 

ane development of nuclear energy 
poses a different type of environmental 
risk, centering on the safety of nuclear 
reactors and the safe custody of nuclear 


ELECTRICITY ENERGY SOURCES 
{in Quadriltions of BTUs) 


conversion process (left). At the right 
are electric sources. As petroleum 
tails off, fission bécomes main factor. 


materials throughout the fuel cycle. Many 
persons, including myself, are therefore 
concerned about the projected growth of 


Approved For Release 1999/09/02 : CIA-RDP79-01194A000100570001-3 


nuclear energy during the remainder of 
the century. My own feeling is that we 
need to redouble our efforts to build a 
greater safety factor into the design and 
operation of our nuclear plants and to in- 
sure greater protection from sabotage and 
from theft of material suitable for fabri- 
cation of nuclear weapons. 

It is hoped that breakthroughs in solar 
energy by the 21st century may preclude 
the need for more fission reactions. In the 
meantimé, we must not set a course which 
will require the.construction of too many 
new reactors too quickly. The Half and 
Half Plan, for that reason, projects a total 
of 35 quadrillion BTUs of nuclear energy 
in 2000 as compared to 49.2 under the 
1972 Department of Interior projection. 

We must also focus more attention on 

the safeguarding and ultimate disposal 
of radioactive wastes (see SMITHSONIAN, 
April 1974), Currently, the mass of waste 
is still small, but even under the Half 
and Half Plan we will have hundreds of 
nuclear plants and therefore a great deal 
more waste products to deal with. We 
must therefore accelerate our efforts to 
develop mere acceptable methods of han- 
dling this material. 

A greater reliance on coal and nuclear 
energy means that we will be moving 
more and more to eectricity in the resi- 
dential and industrial sector. Oil supplies 
will have to be reserved to meet trans- 
portation needs and for petrochemical 
feedstocks. The use of greater amounts of 
electricity in turn means greater losses of 


TRANSPORTATION SECTOR 
_, {tr Qusdrilllons of BTUs) 
2 


Half and Half Plan calls for limited 
energy growth i in transportation sector, 


e at t * 
energy in the process of converting fuel 
to power (see graphs opposite). In other 
words, we will have to burn more and 
more fue] to produce the energy that we 
can actually use. It will also require more 
transmission lines extending across our 
countryside. , 

As a result of the shock of the Arab 
boycott last winter, there is considerable 
pressure these days to ‘scuttle environ- 
mental -constraints and go full-steam 
ahead to produce energy. Much of this 
pressure comes from those who fought 
the environmental movement in the first 
piace and now see the present situation 
as an opportunity to win the battle they 
lost before. The Delaware Coastal Zone 
is an example. 

’ When I was governor, Delaware ‘ale 
ready had extensive industrial areas and 
an existing refinery with room for expan- 
sion. We therefore decided that a 115- 
mile stretch of unspoiled marshes and 
beaches should not be developed for fur- 
ther energy facilities but should instead 
be preserved for their natura] and recrea- 
tional value. Now the pressures are build- 
ing to reverse that decision. It would be a 
major mistake to give in. We need energy, 
but we need to protect our land. 

It would be a mistake to trade an 
energy crisis for a health crisis. 

The United States, then, must make a 
decision about its energy goals to the end 
of the century. We can attempt to con- 
tinue the pattern'of energy growth of the 
recent past, or we can make a serious com- 


EBL 
cia aero ’ 


eewtetts 
erie FREES! Gererstitit 
eae: 


achieved primarily through the use of 
smaller and more efficient automobiles. 


‘4 


ADOU 


i 
| 
CPYRGHT 
ere JOO7- 
mitment to energy co 
choosing between these =f 
we need to reflect upon 
this choice on our lives, 
The poor in our society can make good 
use of more energy. Meeting their needs 
is important, and the growth included in 
the Half and Half Plan can permit them 
to share more fully in the benefits con- 
ferred by our energy-based |economy. But 
for most Americans, I find it difficult to 
conceive how a large increase in energy 
would improve the quality of life appre- 
ciably, even before considering the en- 
vironmental costs and rikks associated 
with this choice. 
My vision of a future guided by the 
Half and Half Plan is of a nation under- 
going some readjustments,| but not fun- 
damental ones, We would Have to recycle 
our waste rather than continue to exploit 
virgin materials (recycling |steel and pa- 
“per, for example, requires 70 percent less 
energy), but this is manifestly desirable. 
We would have to become accustomed to 
smaller cars, and to walking more and 
driving less. We would be slightly cooler 
in the winter and slightly warmer in the 
summer, and we would turn off lights as 
we leave a room and consume fewer 
throwaway articles. Most important, we 
would all have to think abput energy, as 
seriously as we now do abgut money. To 
my mind, few of these changes should 
provide any real discomfor 
Furthermore, a commitment to energy 
conservation may produce; some unfore- 


ervation. Int 
o alternatives 
the impact of 


Limited petroleum stocks will have to 
be reserved to power these automobiles. 


Approved For Release 1999/09/02 : CIA-RDP79-01194A000100570001-3 


CPYRGHT 


seen benefits. For example, as a continu- 
ing energy consciousness influences the 
planners and architects and citizens who 
create our homes and towns and cities, 
we are likely to find ourselves drawn more 
closely together. Instead of living in free- 
standing houses two miles from the store 
and 25 miles from work, we would move 
toward an intermixing of the various ele- 
ments of our lives. The same will be true 
for-our neighbars.as well. : 

The end of profligacy in energy con- 
sumption may well force us to live with a 
greater sense of community—and we may 
just find that we like it. 


1 Incidentally, Saudi Arabia has implied that in its judgment the present high level of 
posted prices would have a disruptive effect on the international payments accounts and 
should, accordingly, be reduced somewhat. While it might be difficult to obtain the sup- 
port of OPEC for a cutback of posted prices, Saudi Arabia could easily achieve a similar 
result by reducing the price at which it sells its own oil to a level equal to the tax-paid 
cost of the companies’ equity crude plus a per-barrel profit comparable to what the pro- 
ducing governments have said the companies are entitled to earn. Such a price would be 
some $3.00 per barrel! jess than 93 percent of posted prices. 


Approved For Release 1999/09/02 : CIA-RDP79-01194A000100570001-3 


Approved For Release 1999/09/02 : CJ 


CPYRGHT 


by Lawrence A. Mayer 


In an era when Americans have been reeling from one 
economic crisis to another, it seems almost Panglossian 
to suggest that some large economic problems may ac- 
tually be getting solved: The problems in question have to 
‘| do with our international economic position, which, only 
| a couple of years ago, was a dependable source of bad 
news. U.S. goods, it then seemed, were not competitive 
in international trade. The dollar was chronically in 
‘trouble. And the broad scheme of international monetary 
arrangements, laboriously fashioned at Bretton Woods 
in 1944, seemed to be in need of a systematic overhaul. 
“It is at least clear that a lot of the recent news about 
these matters has been good. The U.S. trade balance, $7 
billion in the red in 1972, swung back into surplus in mid- 
1973. The new international monetary arrangements, 
based on floating exchange rates, are working reasonably 
| well. And the dollar is a more desirable currency. 
-.sHas the international position of the U.S. undergone a 
| fundamental change for the better? A flatly affirmative 
answer to that question would seem to overstate the case; 
in‘matters pertaining to trade and currency, even ques- 
| tions that seem to be “settled” have a way of popping up 
again. For example, after the Arab oil embargo was im- 
posed, it was taken for granted that the economies of 
Europe and Japan would be set back. It was also widely 
assumed that U.S. investment outlets would attract a lot 
of the surplus revenues the Arab producers were generat- 
ing. For both reasons, the dollar strengthened dramatical- 
ly; its “trade-weighted” value—i.e., the value in relation 
to’ the currencies of other major countries, weighted in 
proportion to our trade with each of them—rose by 14.7 
percent between early July, 1973, and late January, 1974. 

-?But by this spring the oil pinch in Europe and Japan 
caddenly looked less serious, and the U.S. inflation seemed 
-| more serious. Furthermore, the U.S. was not yet receiv- 


sdollar: has. madesa:comeback, but it’s been straining lately—and the strain is no act. 


Approved For Release 1999/09/02 : CIA-RDP79-01194A000100570001-3 


but it will be sorely tested 


€ 2 
. = 
cs sf 


CPYRGHT 


There’s some new muscle in 
the U.S. international position, 


while we and the world learn how 
to deal with the high cost of 
energy importance. 


a 


THE NEW QUESTIONS 
ABOUT THE U.S. ECONOMY VI 


ing much of that Arab money. Consequently, the dollar 
turned down again, losing about two-thirds of the post- 
embargo gain by late April. 

Obviously, then, there remain some questions about the 
strength of the dollar—indeed, of our international posi- 
tion generally. And yet, when all the caveats have been 
entered, it still appears that the most interesting ques- 
tions about our position have to do with the possibility 
that it is becoming a lot stronger. 


Some invisible advantages 


Both the fact of our increased strength, and the nagging 
presence of those oil-related problems, are evident in the 
recent history of the U.S. trade balance. A! surplus in 
U.S. merchandise trade began to materialize last sum- 
mer and for a while seemed to be very strong. But it is 
now clear that the future of the trade balance depends 
very largely on some “unknowable” matters—on the 
amount of oil we must import and on the price we pay for 
it. There are some educated guesses to the effect that our 
bill for foreign oil this year will be in the! $20-billion 
range, versus $7.5 billion in 1973. If the increase is really 
that sizable, then the substantial merchandise|surplus en- 
visaged earlier will become a deficit. 

But when one takes the so-called aint ne interna- 
tional transactions into account, the prospective U.S. po- 
sition looks better. Net income earned on international 
avain bound 
Jo Thomson 


Research assaciate 


Approved For Release 1999/09/02 : 


to outstrip any net deficits incurred by Americans on 
tourism, transportation, and military spending. In. con- 
seyuence, the total current account of the U.S.—the net 
on merchandise trade combined with the net on invisibles 
—may still be roughly in balance this year. 


Given the strong underlying growth in demand for en-. 


ergy in the U.S., and the difficulties involved in bringing 
new sources on stream, oil imports might continue to in- 
erease fairly rapidly for several more years, widening our 
deficit on merchandise trade. But there is a chance that 
the current account may begin to improve before too many 


years if effective economies are madeintheuseofenergy . 


and world oil‘prices are lowered. Moreover, export orders 
for U.S. durable goods are strong. They have doubled just 


in the past two years. One reason is that U.S. goods have 


become relatively cheaper in foreign markets; as of sev- 
eral weeks ago the trade-weighted value of the dollar was 
about 19 percent below the level of May, 1970, when the 
fixed-exchange-rate system began to break up. 


Manv of the durable goods on order are long-lead-time ~ 


items, which in general have been rising—i.e., they will 
be strengthening U.S. export demand for years to come. 
Typical of these are engines and turbines, electrical equip- 
ment, railway equiprhent, aircraft and parts, and ships. 
Plenty of short-lead-time items are also doing well, of 
course, including steel, agricultural machinery, and con- 
struction machinery. Exports of food are at record highs 
and are likely to remain high unless harvests abroad are 
tremendous. 

There will be other opportunities for export gains. 
Many other nations are hastening to develop their-own 
sources of energy, e.g., in the North Sea, and these devel- 
opments could open up markets for U.S.-made oil drilling 
and production equipment, as well as for valves, com- 
pressors, and other pipeline equipment. American indus- 
try has a good chance of selling billions of dollars worth 

_of natural-gas liquefaction plants, tankers to transport 

senergy in cryogenic form, coal-gasification plants, ma- 

‘chinery to manufacture hydrogen or oxygen, equipment 

“to make fuel from waste products, fuel cells, and nuclear 
power equipment. 

Can they afford our goods? 

‘There is one way, however, in which the energy situa- 
tion may have an inhibiting effect on U.S. exports. Europe 
and Japan still have to get adjusted to paying a lot more 
for the oil they import. They took $30 billion worth of 
U.S. goods last year—42 percent of all our exports. Now, 
with their mounting oil bills, the Europeans and Japanese 
will presumably try to hold down on other purchases. In 
addition, those of the less developed countries that are not 

“blessed with their own reservoirs of oil riches will be 

“jusing more foreign exchange to buy oil (as well as food 
and fertilizers). In fact, it is hard to see how countries 
like Indi2 and Bangladesh can fill their most critical im- 
port needs without new infusions of foreign aid. 


CIA-RDP79-01194A00010057000¢R8yRGHT 


President Nixon’s ‘‘Project Independence,” the policy 
designed to make the U.S. self-sufficient in energy by 
1980, may also threaten U.S. exports. Suppose that the 
oil prices don’t stay at their current high level—that they 
are forced down by an avalanche of new supplies. But sup- 
pose also that, by the time this happens, the U-S. is com- 
mitted to exploit a range of expensive energy sources, 
including shale, tar sands, and the less productive oil 
fields. In the past, low-cost energy has helped the U.S. 
compete in international markets. If we now get stuck 
with a lot of high-cost energy, we might dissipate this 
advantage and make U.S. exports more difficult to sell. 

.. Still, there are more reasons for being hopeful about 


*. our trade prospects than could have been cited a few years 


ago. In addition, some businessmen and economists be- 
lieve that the environment for trade has been made 
healthier by one rather important development: the emer- 
gence of the new international monetary arrangements 
based on floating exchange rates. 


Saved by the float 


Floating rates may foreshadow the solution to a prob- 
lem that had affected our international position for years. 
The postwar system of fixed exchange rates, whose ori- 
gins go back to the Bretton Woods Conference, was in- 
creasingly troublesome in the 1960’s. For reasons of do- 
mestic policy and international prestige, nations were 
clinging insistently to their currencies’ par values, in the 
face of evidence that these were unrealistically high or 
low. More and more speculative capital flowed to (or 
from) currencies with strengthening (or weakening) bal- 
ances of payments, forcing abrupt rate changes—which 
were made more painful for having been too long delayed. 

The fixed-rate system represented a special problem for 
the U.S. ; since the value of other currencies was stated in 
terms of dollars, it was difficult for this country to change 
the dollar’s value without disrupting the system. Besides, 
we just didn’t want to devalue—even when the dollar be- 
came steadily more overvalued during the 1960’s. 

Without floating rates, the world would probably have 
gone through several severe currency crises in the past 
year or so—notably in the first half of 1973, when the 
German mark was soaring and the dollar was weak; and 
again when the oil embargo was imposed last fall. During 
the embargo, huge flows of capital would have gone out 
of some European currencies and the Japanese yen. For- 
eign-exchange markets would have had to close and there 
would have been something like hysteria in the banking 
and business communities before rates were repegged. 
But in the event, the float made possible a gradual re- 
balancing of exchange rates. It was harder for speculators 
to ensure themselves against losses when they attacked 
currencies, 

It used to be argued that any. floating system would 
be bad for international investment and trade. Business- 
men would not be able to make deals involving. future 


Approved For Release 1999/09/02 : CIA-RDP79-01194A000100570001-3 


| 


Approved For Release 1999/09/02 : CIA-RDP7 


THE DOLLAR FOLLOWS TRADE, SOMETIME 


9.01194A0001005C@QRGHT 


A stronger trade position is 
supposed to mean a Stronger dollar, 
but the relationship betv-een the two 


- 


commitments if they could not count on stable currency 
rates. This concern seems to have been misplaced. Busi- 
nessmen are still generally able to hedge their bets in the 
forward currency markets. 

. Some critics also argued that a float would inevitably 
be “dirty.” Central bankers would intervene in the cur- 
rency markets, trying to push the value of their own cur- 
rencies down or prevent them from rising, in an effort to 
make their countries’ exports attractive; thus the float 
‘would not really be free after ‘all, and capital would still 
‘be moving around, fleeing from overvalued to under- 
valued currencies. One might suppose that dirty floating 
would seem especially attractive today, because so many 
countries need to boost their exports, in order to get more 
foreign exchange to pay those oil bills. 

In fact, dirty floating has not been much of a problem. 

The main reason is that, in an era of escalating inflation, 


cheaper currencies look a lot less attractive. More and 
'# More countries have become conscious of the fact that de- 
* valuation makes imports more expensive and thus works 


to jack, up the inflation still further. In addition, by en- 
couraging exports, devaluation reduces the supply of 
goods available to domestic consumers—a process that 
also jacks up inflation rates. 

«Actually, some nations may try to increase the value of 
their currencies so as to make imports cheaper and ex- 
ports morejexpensive. Countries that are steadily running 
darge export surpluses are likely to have compelling rea- 


> ssons for wanting their own currencies moved higher— 
something that leading economic-research institutes in 


«diel and:Essen have recommended for Germany. 
Meanwhile, currencies aren’t actually floating with 


in recent years has been more 


complicated. The devaluaiion in 


December, 1971, did 


noi al first seen 


fo help our trade balance, and so the 


1972. After the secon 


begin turning inioas 


doliar kept on drifting lower in early 


id devaluation, 


rplus—but it 


early last year, our a deficit did 


took a while for this f 


clear, and meanwhile), 


continued to sink. ltr 
during the Arab oile 


ct to become 
the dollar 
covered 
bargo fast fal! 


because that was expected to hurt 


the U.S. iess than Eur 


ope or Japan. 


But then the dollar's value fell 
again this year, because of our 


inflation problems. 
The chart covers th 
which the world was t 


1970, other major cur 
1971. (The “trade-we 
values were calculate 
Gvaranty Trust Co.) 


Billions of anttare 


complete freedom. Some of them naturally f 
for example, those in the Western Hemisph 
the dollar, and seven currencies in Europe 
the so-called “snake.” But even apart from t 
float is not exactly free. In order to prev 


© period in 
urning to 


floating exchange rates. The Canad’ 
dollar began to float in the spring cf 


rencies in Aucuft, 
ghted” dollar 
id by Morgan 


i 


| 


HN into blocs 

re are tied to 
are linked in 
ese blocs, the 
nt excessive 


day-to-day fluctuations, central bankers routinely bu 


and sell their currencies in the open market: 


This prucesk 


is generally referred to as “managed floating.” 


Asense of what's fitting 
In principle, managed floating is quite d 
dirty floating. In practice, there seems to be 


i 


ifferent fron 
something o 


an overlap. Central bankers do not ion ed reveal in 


formation about their operations until afte 
do they indicate within what ranges they 


the fact, no 
are trying to 


maintain the values of their currencies; thus it is gen 
erally difficult for an outsider to differentiate between 
operations that are designed to smooth out fluctuationk 
and those intended to affect the fundamental trend o 


currency values. It is known, however, that 


eentral bank 


ers in general have some notions about “‘appropriatef 
rates for their own currencies. Consequently, they'r 
intervening when free-market processes produce result 
that seem to them to be “inappropriate.” To be sure. th 
interventions tend to be moderate. They seam to serve 2 
signals that the central bankers are concerned about tht 


trend of the market—but they are not seri 
buck the market. 


The U.S. appears to be among the countri 
vene in exchange markets on this basis. However. 


ous efforts 19 


es that inter 
Fed 


eral Reserve Chairman Arthur F. Burns retently hinicd 


a bit mysteriously, that the U.S. might go fu 


rther in som 


Approved For Release 1999/09/02 : CIA-RDP79-01194A000100570001-3 


i 
\ 
i 
i 
i 


Approved For Release 1999/09/02 : CIA-RDP79-01194A000100570001 S| 


circumstances. He observed, in testimony before Con- — Communist industrial countries would be transferring ay 
ress, that “no responsible yovernment is prepared to immense quantity of resources to the oil producers. Some 


allow the international value of its currency to be deter- thing like 20 to 80 percent of the industrial countrieg 
mined solely by the untrammeled play of market forces.” exports would go to the oil-producing countries during 
Burns then ‘added a sentence that has since been much the next few years, versus 4 percent in 1972. In fact, th 

quoted ; ‘We in the United States certainly cannot accept purchases will surely be much smaller, because the Arab 
with equanimity exchange-rate movements that clearly — oil countries in particular—including the one with thp 
undervalue the dollar.” most oil of all, Saudi Arabia—don’t have the population 

There is some disagreement about the meaning of those or technology to absorb that many goods. 
wide swings in the value of the dollar since it started to Within a few years, therefore, the oil countries ma 
float in February, 1973. Professor Peter B. Kenen of — add something like $135 billion to their financial assets 
Princeton believes that the subsequent large decline, the asum roughly equal! to the official international reserves 
recovery beginning in late July, and the recent retreat of of the advanced countries early last month. Projection 
the dollar, are all perfectly normal. “It’s not a calamity,” for ten years ahead run from two to four times that su 
Kenen insists. “It’s the way markets behave. Why should ‘The only financial markets capable of absorbing inves#- 
exchange markets be more stable than those in copper or-, ments on any such scale are, of course, in countries wit 
cocoa? I am not saying that money is a commodity, but well-developed economies. Since these advanced couy- 
we have lived so long with narrow movements in exchange tries are in general the ones incurring the increased of! 
rates that a 20 percent change seems enormous—and it bill, it is clear that, by and large, those “petrodollars 

| shouldn’t.” : will be coming home. ; 

On the other hand, Edward M. Bernstein, a veteran of Nevertheless, there are many countries in the indug- 
international currency negotiations who is now a Wash- trial world that won’t be getting nearly enough inves}- 
ington-based consultant, believes that “we shouldn’t want ment inflows to offset the higher oil bills. The U.S. has 
haphazard swings like those of last year.” He believes —_a tremendous advantage over Japan and most of Europe 
the swings can and will be moderated. in this respect: we are less dependent on imported ofl 

It is agreed, at least, that some rules need to be estab- than they are, and we have highly developed capital may- 
lished for the floating-rate game. Efforts to develop kets that seem likely to attract sizable sums from the 
guidelines for intervention by central banks were going oil-producing countries. In the near term, it is true, 

| forward in the International Monetary Fund last month, lot of this money will be flowing into the chief European 
and some principles were expected to emerge soon. money markets—including the Eurodollar market. Still, 

Aside from the guidelines, the IMF has for about two there is a prima facie case for expecting the dollar to lc 
years been developing proposals to replace or refornrthe, stronger in the long run than the Japanese yen or mo#t 
collapsed Bretton Woods system. But even without any’ European currencies. 
resounding new agreements on this weighty matter, a lot ; 
has been accomplished. A system of sorts is in place, Aneed to spread it around 
which means that there is something to elaborate, im- Indeed, it may become an important responsibility qf 
prove upon, or amend—that there is no need to start commercial and investment bankers in the U.S. and othar 
from scratch. In effect, the world is backing into mone- countries to relend abroad many of the oil-country funds 

they receive. There is a widespread feeling that, in th]s 
” “recycling” effort, the existing private markets must He 
The case for a strong dollar supplemented by special arrangements. For examplp, 
“It!is not entirely clear whether we are also backing | former Secretary of the Treasury George P. Shultz hds 
; into an era in which the dollar will be strong. The case for suggested creating a kind of internationally sponsorqd 
|. thinking that it will be strong is rather complex and has mutual fund to take in Arab money and invest it hee 
| to do largely with the chain of events set off by the world and abroad. H. Johannes Witteveen, the managing diret- 
oil cartel when it began pushing up prices last year. tor of the International Monetary Fund, has been trying 
"The sharp rise in oil prices is equivalent to a tax levied to set up a special “oil facility” to recycle some of tie 
by the oil countries on their customers. This tax promises, money flowing to the countries with surpluses. And tHe 
in the words of Nathaniel Samuels, a partner of Kuhn, | Shah of Iran has expressed a willingness to lend monqy 
Loeb & Co., “to transfer wealth from one set of countries at below-market rates to needy countries. 
to another on a scale and at a speed never experienced Thus the recycling process is likely to create a lot of 
: before.” However, the transfer is not the end of the new money flows in the world. In some circumstancep, 
: matter; ultimately, it seems likely, that wealth will re- the U.S. might actually be competing with Europeans fqr 
; turn to the more industrialized nations, as payment for funds. With the ending of controls on lending and invest- 
“ their goods or in the form of investments. ing abroad, U.S. bankers have a new incentive to raige 
If all the money were used to purchase goods, the non- funds. If interest rates on certificates of deposit weye 


tary reform. 
af 


kt 


Approved For Release 1999/09/02 : CIA-RDP79-01194A000100570001-3 


| 
Approved For Release 1999/09/02 : CIA-RDP79-01194A00010057000¥GHT : 


competitive with Eurodollar rates, a lot of short-term 
money ‘could be attracted from the Eurodollar market— 
some of which would then go right back again, as loans. 

The end of capital controls also means that our invest- 


ment bankers might recapture a lot of financing business 


that has recently been done in Eurobonds. That is, U.S. 
corporations can once again finance their foreign subsid- 
iaries by issuing bonds in the U.S. and sending the pro- 
ceeds abroad. Foreigners may also want to float debt 


issues here because of the excellent U.S. secondary mar- — 


kets. Some foreigners are put off by the Securities and 
Exchange Commission’s registration requirements for 
new bonds, which are a Jot stiffer than European borrow- 
ers are accustomed to. But Europeans can also resort to 
private placements, which avoid the SEC disclosure rules. 


Though recycling may divert a lot of the petrodollars 4 


abroad, the U.S. is still expected to end up with more of 
the oil producers’ investments than anyone else. Some 
such expectation, in any case, represents a main hope for 
a strong dollar in the years ahead. 


They're making us save | 
There is one other perspective from which the higher 


} oil prices might be viewed as good news for the U.S. The 
| Arab “oil tax” seems to involve a kind of forced saving 


for the industrial world, i.e., it is obliged to consume less, 
yet at the same time it is expecting to receive vast invest- 
ment funds of a kind normally provided out of domestic 
savings. As it happens, this forced saving is occurring 
at a most opportune time—a period in which many busi- 
nessmen and economists have been expressing concern 
about a great world capital shortage. Whatever other ef- 
fects the higher oil prices have, they are at least creating 
tremendous supplies of capital. 

On the other hand, the industrial world can take only 
so much “good news” of this kind. It is not clear what 
would happen if producers of other basic materials emu- 
lated the oil producers and formed cartels. Senator 
Abraham A. Ribicoff of Connecticut recently conjured 


a up an image of “‘an international squeeze play affecting 


ste = 


such materials as chromium, tin, manganese, platinum, 
cobalt, nickel, bauxite, and asbestos.” C. Fred Bergsten, 
‘an economist at the Brooking Institution, has been raising 
“similar alarms. The recent demand by Jamaica, that 
‘aluminum producers make far greater tax and royalty 
payments on the island’s bauxite, has intensified these 
concerns. 

Conventional wisdom holds that cartels are bound to be 


more or less transitory. Even oil, admittedly a special 


. case in many ways, eannot have its price rigged indefi- 
_nitely, according to the traditional view: sooner or later, 


“one or another member of the cartel will start shaving 
the price in order to increase the member’s own revenues. 
Cartels can also be undermined by various consumer stra- 
tagems, including, for example, substituting steel for tin 
and the development of synthetics (rubber). 


Approved For Release 1999/09/02 : CIA-RDP79-01194A000100570001-3 


ut Bergsten 
no longer applies. He adds, ominously, ‘ 
successful cartelization come from an era which no 
seems light-years away. Shortages of su 
placed shortages of demand as the domi 
world economics for the first time in almo 
and the power position of suppliers and consumers hag 
thus changed dramatically.” It is still uncertain whethey 
Bergsten or the traditionalists are correct in their respec 
tive views on this matter. 


A dilemma with a wallop | 


All things considered, the U.S. international positio 
has surely been improving. When President Nixon for 
mally ended the convertibility of the dollar into gold o 
August 15, 1971, and thus finished the whole Bretto 
Woods system, no one knew quite what would happen 
There was widespread fear of competitivel devaluationg 
and of a turn to autarchy among nations. Floating was a 
fearsome step advocated mainly eect tae 

The dire forebodings, then, have so far proved to be 
misplaced. On the other hand, the new international eco 
nomic environment presents a few problems that werd 
not envisaged earlier. One has to do with exchange-rate 
policy in an age of inflation. 

We now know that lower exchange rates can have a 
terrific inflationary wallop. But higher exchange rate 
can wallop an economy too: they reduce [exports and, 
therefore, foreign-exchange earnings—which mos 
countries desperately necd in order to pay their oil bills, 
It is not clear that the present floating arrangements 
could endure if many countries, searching for an elu 
sive optimal rate, adopted dirty-floating policies. 

There is an especially tricky problem about the appro 


' priate exchange rate for the U.S. Suppose that the rate 


goes up sharply, reflecting a sizable inflow of Arah in 
vestments. A rising rate would profoundly affect the 
structure of American industry, i.e., by shifting the bal 
ance between export- and import-oriented industries ; but 
the new structure might come undone some years later 
when those Arab investments petered out-—and the ex 
change rate went down. Altogether, this would appear to 
be a rather painful sequence for a lot of Americans. 
But suppose, alternatively, that those , 


rate falls. This too could affect the structu 
and, of course, Jeave us facing heavier doses 

As all these stunning new problems come into focus, it 
is increasingly clear that the international/economic en 
vironment was transformed by the oil-price explosion. If 
is noteworthy, and encouraging, that the explosion took 
place without tearing apart the world’s great web of 
trade. There have been some displays of rae aggressive 
self-concern, but, in general, the leaders of the industria 
world have worked together remarkably well. We can only 
hope they continue to do so. 


