. . LYIINGKESSIOINAL 
is ay 4 » RECORD 


/ Approved For Release 200H/05/24c5§|A-RDP75-0000 


Q 4 _ FOIAb 


CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY. : ots Bae, ‘ 
Mr. YOUNG of North Dakota. Mr.! ‘ ; ; 
President, I ask unanimous consent to, 
have printed in the Reconp as a part of “ ym ss i 
my remarks a most informative article: © © f+ 4: : 
ea appearing in the July 18 issue of U.S. doa ie © ae ES as een 
e ‘ ‘News & World Report entitled “what's ; ta #antta 2 eS a 
i HP, OTA? . ate eteweees: \ . ame] 
This Interview with Adm. William F. = ee | teas AD oe 
Rahborn, retiring head of CIA, is most oe oe ae 
Hnformative, especially as to the scope of | agen oe ag! wires ae 
‘CIA’s operations and how it is directed, ' j : - 
‘supervised, and controlled by the Presi- oa as ; ee fay Sod 
‘dent of the United States, various agen-. fa : Be eM 
‘eles of the executive department of the: re ae ig HB Ae Nae 
. Government, as well as the Congress of eS eee aA Pete he 
ithe United States. kee i ae ce aed 
“ There being no objection, the article Nace 
“was ordered to be printed in the Recorp,. 3 
Prat “as follows: ; : ne ’ 
Co) ‘ -" - {From the U.6, Nows & World Report, June, : eae ae 
18, 1960} oy as 
| Wirat’s “CIA'?—Intorview Wir ADM. WIL. 
' vam BP, Raponn, ReTminc Heap oF AMEn-' 
v ; “1. rea’s Mosy|Secner AGENCY : 
. | (NoreOnce more, the Central ‘Intelll-. 
gence Agency—CIA—finds itself a center of. 
: controversy. 1 
(Congress ts oatudying & proposal to. 
broaden Ita contro] and surveillance of the soc wee one at 
wide-ranging intelligence organizations, . ip. tase EE ihe wit we te 
: (Now questions aro raised. dust what is LOHR ag POR Ean Tas eg ; 
CIA? What does it renity do—and not do? Dae aor eRe ‘i 
‘Does anybody know all its secrets, control’ Sy Bie Whew hate Daas 
its activities? Sg eee 
» (In this exclusive Interview, the man who eT eT a et a 
theaded Central Intelligence this past year Batetig, YS Sol Se Sea 
takes readers of "U.S. News & World Report”. ante ees” : 
‘pehind the scenes of CIA, describes Its work-' it 
ings in detail.) 
, Question, Admiral Raborn, what 1s tho: 
specific charter of the Centra) Intelligence 
Agency within tho intelligence community?! 
‘Answer, The National Secutlty: Act ie 
ve funotions to tho Agency:., ,. 


continued 


Approved For Release 2000/05/24 : CIA-RDP75-00001R0001001 10056-4 


ar 


pid AB es aac a a 


Poon 


A 
| 
| 


' to be. 


~ intelligence.” 


Te advice the National Security Council— 
and of courso tho President—on Intelligonce 
mattera relnting to national security; 

To co-ordinntoe all forolgn-intelligence ac- 
tivities of our Government; 

To produce and disseminate finished na- 
tional intelligence within the Government; 

To undertako what wo call “services of 
common concern"—that is, functions which 
serve all the compcnents of the intelligence 
community and can best be undertaken cen- 
trally; \ 

And finally, to perform such other services 
as the Natlonal Security Council may direct. 

That ts ns specific as the Congress wanted 
That fifth assignment 1s the Agency’s 
charter for clandestine activitics, and you 
will notico 1t puts CIA directly under the 
control of the President's National Security 
Council, 

* Question, Tho emphasis appears to be on 


{nformation gathering. Wouldn't it be more © 


palatable and just ag accurate to call it the 
“Central Information Agency"? 

Answer. Our principal responsibility Is to 
gather, specifically, that information which 
relates directly to national-security problems 
and objectives. The United States Informa- 
tion Agency deals with information in the 
broader senso of the term, and distributes It 
outside tho Government. It is uscful both 
to their operations and to ours to preserve 
this distinction. 

There is a further point in our professional 
terminology: “Intelligence,” as wo use the 
term, refers to information which has been 
carefully ovalunted ns to its accuracy and 
significance, Tho difference between “in- 
formation” and Intelligonce” is the Important 
process of evaluating tho accuracy and as- 
sessing the significance in terms of national 
security, 


Question, You just referred to “finished . 
national intelligence.” What Is that in your 
terminology? 


Answer. When a raw report has been 
checked for accuracy, and annlyzed and in- 
tegrated with all othor available information 
on tho same subject by competent experts 
in that particular field, wo call It “flnished 
When, tn addition, it repre- 
sents the conclusions of the entire Intelli- 


gence community, then It is “national in-' 


telligence.” In short, we find that we necd 
& terminology which can be more precise 
and more Imiting than the broad sonoeps 
of “information.” 

Question, Pcople scem to have the im- 
pression that tho CIA is a big spying orga- 
nization—that It is stnifed olmost entirely by 
sples, Is there anything to that impres- 
sion? 

Answer. This, of course, is the popular 
view of any: intelligence organization, but 
it is highly distorted. Our job fs to keep 
the top officinis of the U.S. Government In- 


formed of what is happening around the 


world that may affect bhe national security 
of tho United Siates,, 


Of course, much of the worid's area and 
population is under a closed socicty, run by 
governments that scck to conceal thelr ac- 
tivities and their objectives. They may bo 
hostile to us, and some classical esplonago 
is required to give timely warning of when 
and how these activities and objectives might 
threntcn us. But, to maintain proper per- 
apective, let me point out that a great deal 
of the raw information is public, or available 
with a certain amount of digging. 

Tho principal rolo of an intelligenco or- 
ganization ts to take what is overt and what 
ls secret and bring expert knowledge, back- 
ground Information, and scholarly analysis 
to bear In a way which has nothing in com- 
mon with the heroes of modern spy fiction. 

Question. Could you give us the propor- 
tions between the analysts at home and the 
men in the fleld overseas who are  collenting 
this information? ’ 


vy 


Answer, Wo don't publish these figuros, or 
even rough proportions, because the Informa-~ 
tion would bo of (:ront uso ta tho oppoaltion, 
but I cnn tell you this much: Tho man who 
joins CIA hag far less chance, in the course of 
his onreer, of Identifying with Janes Bond or 
“Tho Spy Who Caino in From the Cold” than 
ho does of serving ns an academic researcher, 
economist, scientist, statistician, adminis- 
\trator, accountant, or supply officer. 

Question, Another idea is that the CIA is 
stirring up insurrections, or starting and 
maybo running ttle wars— 


Answer, This again is a misconception, . 


Our major business is national intelligonco, 
and so-called covert operations are o rela- 
tively minor. part of ‘our over-all activities. 
Tho Government, after ail, is organized on a 
pretty logical basis: The Department of State 
is in charge of foreign policy and foreign 
relations; running wars would be tho bual- 
ness of tho Defense Department; CIA has 
enough to do getting, coordinating, and dis- 


seminating intelligence without running any 


wars, 
Question. The National Security Act of 
1947 envisages a Neld of clandestine activi- 


ties, however, where the CIA will play a role . 


which cannot be undertaken by State, or 
Defense, or other overt agencies of the United 
States Government. Do you have a free hand 
there? 

Answor, Absolutely not. Any such actlvi« 
ties are by direction of the National Se- 
curity Council. To be precise, they must 


. have the prior approval—in detail—of a com- 


mittee of the NSC on which top-ranking rep- 
resentatives of tho President, the Scoretary of 
State, and the Secretary of Defcnso meet 
with the Director of Central Intelligence for 
this purpose. These gentlemen see to it not 


only that every activity of the CIA is com-- 


pletely in consonance with the established 
policies and objectives of the United States, 


_ but that It is also advantageous to the United 


Btates. 

Question. With that approval, are you free 
to operate ne you wish in the field? Would 
the U.S. ambassador in the country con- 
cerned know about your activities there? 

Answet.\}ike other U.8. officials abroad, 
CIA's overseas personnel are subordinate to 
the U.S. ambassadors. 
in competition with other U.S. representation 
abroad—we complement and supplement the 
“country team" approach of the embassy to 


“oMcial U.S. activities. Wo operate with the 


foreknowledge and approval of tho ambnssa« 
dor. 

Question, But some of our ambassadors 
have denicd any prior knowledge of activities 
which are known to be, or at least suspected 
of being, CIA opcrations— 

Answer, Conceivably there might be an tn- 
stance where the Department of State in 
Washington would have reasons for not in- 
forming the ambassador, Normal policy is 
to have him inforined, 

Question. Doos the ambassador receive 


ryour intelligence in the fold, or does he have 


to get it from Washington? 


Answer. It is made available in the field 


to the ambassador and designated members 
of his staff. If the ambassador wishes, ho 


‘also gets the ultimate finished evaluation. 


from headquarters, along with intelligence 
on other countrics which may be of interest 
to him. The Departmont of State may alse 
wend to its embassies and lezations the 


* finishod intelligence reports ‘prepurad by CIA, 


Question. You and your predeeisors have 
stated, as havo tho President acd Secretary 
Rusk, that CIA docs not make policy, but the 
accusation persista, 
your information 
decielons? 

Answer, To ma ntain that record, lot me 
Bay again flatly that CLA does not make 
polloy, and doca not operate outulde or con- 
trary to estobiisi.cd policy, 


contributes to policy 


wots 


We are certainly not . 


Could this be because . 


Now, certainly "a0 pat fm 


July 14, Approved For ReteaGa 2000/05/24. i CIAER DPS 00001 R000100110056-44939 


nobody would expect the top officials of o 


govornment to mako thelr decisions without 
considering all available information. It is 
tho mission of CIA to provide the most necu- 
rate, the most comprehensive, and the most 
objective information available about mat- 
ters which Interest our Government, together 
with whatever wo can learn or project about 
possible impending developments, In spe- 


cific answor to your question, put the em- | 


phasis on “objective” Information, 

Question. But this information does play 
® part in the decisions of Government— 

Answer. Tho top officials of the Adminis- 
tration, and for that matter, the legislators, 
obviously find 1¢ useful, bocauso there is a 
constant increase in the demand for our 
current intelligence and our projective osti- 
mates. Lot me point out that there is one 
unique contribution the CIA makes to Gov- 
ernment officials ‘facing a choice between 
alternative possible courses of action. Pre- 
cisely becauso the CIA does not commit It- 
acif to any one choice among the alternatives, 
our intelllgence input is free from partisan- 
ship or advocacy, and recognized by the 
recipients as objective. 

Question. Isn't it true that much of the 
information you gather isn't really secret at 
all, but would be available to anybody in the 
Tight spot at the right time? 

Answer. Yes, In fact, a considerable part 
of the information used by the Agency in 


preparing its finished Intelligence reports is — . 
derived from the forelgn press and radio, ° . 


from technical journals of foreign countries, 
and from official publications of these coun- 
tries.. We don’t disregard information sim- 
ply because It is not secret. 
telligence, however, consists of the expert 
correlation and interpretation of all the In- 


formation we can obtain, by both overt and ¢ - : 


elandestine menns. 
CIA’S BROAD INTERESTS 


Question. Do you gather information about , 


domestic events in foreign countries, o5 well 
as the operations of foreign governments? 


. Answer. Our interests and responaibilitics - , 
- may vary from country to country, but they © 


are pretty comprehensive. It is obviously 
impossible to confine yourself to a nation's 


foreign affairs if you ore responsible, for In- <:) | 
stance, for assessing the stability of the 
regime, the health of the cconomy, or the . 


prospects for subversion in the boondocks. 
Question. Do you collect information of a 
business nature? 
Answer. We collect economic information 


which may be useful to the security interests . 
‘of the U.S. Government—and we collect it 
exclusively for that purpose. 


Question. Do you have to cover every cor- 
ner of the whole world?. 

Answer. Of courso we have priorities, but 
our intelligence requirements are worldwide, 
Our top Administration offictals need factual 


, and unbiased intelligence on a timely basis 


os one of the many elements which go into 


the decisions they have to make. At a mini- 


mum, we have to have certain basic informa- 
tion on hand about virtually every country 
in the world. Country X—~you namo it~ 
might appear remote and totally unrelated 
to our national security, but it 1s nevertheless 


impossible to state with certainty that de-- 


Finished In- © 


tailed information about country X will not . 


become necessary to o 

crash basia some day, 
Question. How detailed? 
Answer. The basic information on ‘foreign 


Government on a 


countries which is compiled in what we call | 


tho National Intelligence Surveys alrondy 
adds up to more than 10 times the size of 
“The Encyclopaedia Britannica.” Much of 
this information, of course, is hardly secrot. 


Tt has to cover such prosaic matters as eco- - 


nomic statistics, logal codes, soclological con- 
ditions and transport facilities, but It comes 
in handy when our set ag nec aot ene 


Approved For. Release 2000/05/24 : Cla. RDP7S5- 000040001001 10086-4 4, 


ey 
hte ow A 


5 ss 


pees te 


‘ 


55 in Dee 


_ Mttachés and labor attachés, 


yéApproved For Release 2ON@¢/AGs@fonGIA FARE RE 00Q04R9901001 100564, 1h, 19664 


Question, At what point do you feel that 
this type of information—tho basic data, tho 
information which is open to tho public— 
should bo reported back on a running basis 
to our Government—ns fast ns you get 1b? 

Anawer. This goca back to the distinction 
between Information and intelligenco—and 
the needs of our Government. If everything 
is quict, there may bo an occasional situn- 
tion report based largely on open informn-< 
tion. If the situntion has a dircct relation to 
U.S. national-security interests, particularly 
ino crisis, we will be trying to get ns close 
to “real time” reporting as modern com- . 
munications permit, 

Question. Is the Information which you 
coliect interpreted by somebody on the acene,. 
or docs it reach you in raw form so thot. 
you can sort out the focts from the opin- 
fons? 

Answer, Wo require the original report, or 
tho original statement of the primary source, 
whenever wo can get It. When this “raw 
material” reaches us, 1t may be accompanied 
by the opinions and interpretations of in+ 
termediaries through whom the information’ 
has passed, and by tho Informed comment 
and preliminary evaluation of our own col- 


- lectors in the field, but these additions are 


Clearly labeled as such. 

Question. How do you co-operate in ‘the 
field with the other elements of your intelll- 
gence community? Aren't CIA and State 
and the military-intelligence people all look« 
ing for much tho same Information? 

Answor. Our finished national intelligence 
derives from the work of oll of the elements 
of tho Intelligence community. Foreign 
Service officers provide the Department of 
State with political intelligence, commercial 
attachés are responsible for economic {n= 
formation, the military attachés send miH- 
tary intelligence to their respective services, 
and, for that matter, there are agricultural 
All of them 
provide departmental intelligence. for tho 
specific needs of specific departments. All 
of these reports are also avaliable to CIA, 

The Agency has been added to supplement 
and expand the collection and fill any gaps, . 
It has a broader charter for all types of in- % 


. teliigence necessary in tho national interest, 


and—as I mentioned at the outset—the 
added statutory responsibility to “correlate 
and evaluate intelligence relating to the na- 
tional security, and provide for... appro~ 
priate dissemination.” 

Yor example, a plece of political intelii- 
genco from one country and the Army at-" 
taché's report from another country may add 


* up to A conclusion of major significance to’ 


tho National Security Councti, or apecificaliy 
to the Atomle Energy Commission. It is 
CIA's responsibility to see to it that the two 
Halves do get added up in Washington to 
make the whole, and furthermore that the 
finished evaiuation reaches the department 
which needs It, 


CONTROLS ON INTELLIGENCE 


Question, But how do you avoid duplica- 
tion of effort in the field? 

Answer. The United States Intelligence _ 
Board, which represents the ‘entire intolll- 
genco community, establishes guldelines and 
priorities for the intelligence-collection ef~ 
fort. This machinery can control unneces- 
sary duplication, but when you are after the 
closcly guarded information that affects our 
national interest, duplication of effort ts 
often desirable rather than unnecessary. 

Question, Are tho State and military-in- 
telligence people operating under handicaps, 
in comparison to CIA, in obtaining 
information? oe 

Answer. You have to take into considera-:; 
tion, Orstly, that the collection of intell- 
genco ls not the primary responsibility of tho 
Department of Btate and the Department of 
Defense, and, secondly, that the Tepresenta~ 


agp? 


Go as PR | . 
wm) “ 


"Approved For Release 2000/05/24 : CIA-RDP75-00001R000100110056-4 , 


3 


tives they send abrond must operate in tho 
open a4 recognized officials of the U.S, Gov- 
ernment, 
postion to obtain neccssary intelligence be- 
causo CIA js specifically organized for this 
Kind of collection and can give it first 
priority, 

If, by handicaps, you menn the obstacics 
which forelgn governments place In tho way 
of intelligence collection, forolgn govern- 
monts make every offort to preserve thoir es- 
sential secrets, just as wo do. Year by: year, 
security procedures becomo more sophisti- 
cated and harder to circumvent, so that skill 
and specialization aro even moro necessary, 
On the other side of the coin; there aro few, 
if any, countrics in the world today which 
aro as much of an “open soctety” as the 
United States, 

Question. What about co-operation with 
tho intelligenco services of friendly countries? 
If we collect information which is important 
to one of our allies, is tt passed to them? 

Answer. I am not at Hberty to go into 
detail, but wherever it {s of mutual interest 
and advantage, there is substantial co-opera- 
tion among the Intelligence services of 
friendly countries. . 

Question. Docs machinery exist to cor- 
relate all of the information that flows into 
Washington, and rofine it into firm and 
useful conclusions? . 

. Answer. Yes—specifically, the United 
States Intelligence Doard, or USIB, which 


‘ advises and assists the Director of Central 


Intelligence aud ia under his chairmanship, 
This Board meets every week, or more often 
if necersary, 0 co-ordinate the work of all 
of the intelligence components of the U.S. 
Governinent, It consists of the Deputy Di- 
rector of Central Intelligence, who represents 
CIA so that the Director, as USIB chairman, 
will be uncommitted; the Director of Intelli- 
gence nnd Research, Department of State; 


the Director of tho Defense Intelltgence- 


Agency: tho Director of the National Se- 


curity Agency; an Assistant Director of the © 


FBI; and tho Assistant General Manager for 

Administration of the Atomic Energy Com- 
ission. The heads of Army, Navy and Air 
ree intelligence meot with the Board as 

observers. : , 

USIB assigns intelilgence priorities to see 
to it that thero are no gaps in our coverage, 
and insures that the judgments which go 
forward to the President are finished national 
intelligence. 

This job of correlation and co-ordination, 
however, starts long beforo the product 
reaches USIB for final review. More and 
more, as we develop and refine the concept of 
an intelligence community, the anolyats and 
the spccinlists in one component are in con- 
stant touch and interchange with their op- 
posite numbers in the other departments and 
agencies, 60 that the national-intelligence 


process beging as soon as the raw information ® 


reaches Washington, if not before, 


‘As for moving from tho raw inforrantion to 
a firm and agreed conclusion, In many in- 
stances this can be done by the expert ana- 
lysts available, backed up by our storehouse 
of background knowledge. There will always, 
of course, be the “unknowables"—questions 
which have no definitive answers, posaibly 
because the future ts open to the effects of 
many varinbics, or bocnuse the future do- 
pends on decistons which certain foreign 
statesmen may not even have made yet. 
Who will succced the Premier of country X7 
When and by whom will thore be a coup in 
country Y? 

Our Government leaders need and requost 
our best onswers on the "unknowables,” 
This we do tn our National Intelligence Esti- 
mates. From what we do know, the best 
thinking availiable in the entire intelligence 
community mokes rational inferences about 

‘. . ey oN 


In effect, CIA often 1s in better, 


- dent and the National Security Counelt. 


~ possessions, 


. of potential Interest or concern to ench 
' other, 


the unknown—with varying but specified de- if coxicept of a Central Intelligerice Agency ths! | 


grees of confidence, and an occasional fot. 
note reflecting an individual Alasent trom use 
agreed opinion. 

Question. How many of theso catimates da 
you produce? 

Answer, It varics with the need, The Pau. fF: 
mato 1s not a global periodical, on n weeks, f 
or dally basis; it addresses itself to the prot. 
able course of ono development, or one coun. 
try. Many of the Estimates como out with at. : 
acheduled frequency—annuoally, for instance [ 
{f necessary. Some nro Produced In times ¢f 
crisis in & matter of hours. All are Rearey EF 
to the intelligenco needa of tho top Govern. BF . 
ment officials. All reflect the grentest pout. fy | 
ble professional skill and dispnasionnte oh Bo 
Jectivity we can bring to benr. CIA hnan k- -. 
ax to grind, and docs not permit Iteclf tobe 
come advocate of a specific Polley in prepar- 
ing «on Estimate. 

All aspects of every Estimate get the tun. 
est consideration, by tho Interagency work. f 
ing groups which begin the drafting, by the 
Board of Natlonal Estimates—a group of dis. 
tUnguished senlor officers of long experlenes 
and proven competence In diverse Nelda c! 
Government—and by the United Statea tn. 
telligence Board. In tho end, the Nationa: 
Intelligence Estimate ts the report of the ¥- 
Dircctor of Central Intelligence to the Tres. Be 


Question. Can this machinery operate fart A 
enough to permit quick action when the few fk 
of information suggests impending dang: 
or trouble? 5 

Answer, The process {8 extremely fexltte 
Concelvably, when tho schedule permite, th 
draft of an annual Estimate might atart too 
or three months before tho target date, i 
permit comprehensive nnd deliberate gen. 
aultation, reforende to the ficld, and so fiwih 

On the other hand, the Bonrd of Nations’ fi 
Estimates when required can complete what 6 
wo call a “SNIE"—a. Special National Inte’: 
Heenee Estimate—in o matter of hours, #6 5 
sald, 

As for immediate Intelligence an eunwnt 
developments, wo are genred to recsive tn. 
formation, evaluate it, produca inteliigenes 
and react 24 hours a day, seven dayw w week 
Nobody in tho Agency, from the annbyata Ww 
the Director, is guaranteed a night's unine 

_terrupted sleep, or an unbroken week-end. 


WORKING WITH TK MY 


Question. As we understand tt, the Cen. 
tral Intelligence Agency docs not rin clantdes, 
‘tine operations of any kind within the 
United States, Is that left entlroly to the 
FBI? \ 
Answer, The CIA has tho reaponslbility for 
conducting operations outside the country; 
the FBI has as {ts principal minalon the In- 
ternai security of the United Btatea and Ita 


‘There is, of course,.close co-operation and 
considerable interplay between our organiza. 
tions, because we are combatting nn Inter. 
national conspiracy whose operations and 
agents move back and forth between (hte 
country and foreign nations. Tho FAT and 
CIA therefore. work very closoly together and 
keep each other intimately informed on ttemn 


This allows us to combat Internn- 
tional conspiracy in the most effective por. 
aible manner, 

The division of responsibility for elandes- 
tine operations, of course, should not be 
confused with the perfectly overt contacts 
CIA has domestically—for example, with ox- 
perts in the profesional world to diactan in. 
ternational eituations and  oxchange 
analyses. . : ; 

Question. Do you work largely ina vacuum, F 
with littie or no contact with the rest of the 
Government outside the Intelligence commu: ¢ 
nity? 

* Answer, By no means. It is inhorent in the 


ie, 
F -4 


Lanais te dene oe tala 


“thins ied 2%. 


"Soe 3 


4 
i 


4. 


7 sly Ly Apisroved For REQNGE BUSGNSIRE@ALRDPRNAIOOOT R000100110056-44941 


any branch of the Government which has a” 
legitimate need for information can call on 
us for it. By tho samo token, when wo need 
expertise to help us in evaluation, or In the 
accomplishment of any of our missions, wo 
will not hesitate to go anywhero In the Gov- 
ernment or outside it, within the limitations 
of security, where we might expect to find tho 
necessary help. But our closest ties, of 
course, are within the intelligence commu- 
nity, and to the top oMclals of the executive 
branch, ; 

Question, What form do your intelligence 
reports take? 

Answer. Wo disseminate finished Intolli- 
gence In an Infinite variety of formats, tail- 
ored to specific purposes. I reported fro- 
quently in person, of course, to the President 
and to the Natlonal Security Council, I havo 
mentioned the Estimates, and our "55-foot 
shelf" of basle background information, 

In addition, we have daily, weekly ond 
monthly publications, some global in scope, 
some for a specific country or crisis, When 
the situation is truly critical, I have on occa« 
sion ordered situation reports os often as 
every hour on the hour, around the clock. 
Then there are individual memoranda which 
give us great flexibility in scope, format, 
deadlines and distribution, And we also turn 
out studics in depth which are the equivalent 
of a scholarly book or a doctoral dissertation, 
Various publications have dissemination lists, 
depending on their sensitivity and purpose, 
which range from less than half a dozen 
coples to hundreds, 

Question. What fs the “ancestry” of the 


CIA in U.S, Intelligence activitics? Doos it 


operate differently from its predecessors? 
Answer. The Agency grew from the need to 
establish a centralized and objective Intelll- 
gence organization in peacetime. 
impetus, of course, was the experience of 


Pearl Harbor, and the determination to In-- 


suro against such surprises in the future, . 

The requirement for o centralized organt- 
zation stemmed from the successful experi- 
ence during World War II of the Office of 
Strategic Services under General Donovan. 
The requirement was made all the more real 
by the threat posed by an evangelistic inter- 
national Communism which became readily 
apparent shortly after the close of World War 
Ii, There was general agreement within the 
Government that there was need for a non- 
partisan co-ordinating agency in the intelll- 
gence field, As o result, the CIA was created 
in 1947, 

In some respects the Office of Strategic 
Services of World War II was our ancestor, 
bul it did not have CIA's responsibility for 
co-ordinating the work of the entire intellH- 
gence community, or our requirement for 
across-the-board coverage, 

Question. Dots CIA havo anything that 
might be called regulations to govern its 
activities? Who prescribes them? 

Answer. Is there o Government agency 
nearly 20 years old that docsn't have a rule 
book? Start with tho original legislation, 
which spells out the mission of CIA and pro- 


vides that wo function at the behest and ' 


under the control of the President and the 
NSC. Under that charter, CIA is governed 
by several layers of regulations known as 
the “Nonsklids,” or National Security Council 
Intelligence Dircctives; the DCID's, or Di- 
rector of Central Intelligence Directives, 
Issued by the Director in his capacity as 
chairman of USIB, and hend of the Iintelil- 
genco community; and finally, os In the case 
of any other governmental component, CLA's 
own Agency regulations, 
MELP FROM “DEST DRAINS” 

Question. Do you have any counsel or ad- 
‘visers outside the Govornmont? 

Answer, Wo have several panels of tech- 
nical experts, both inside and outalde the 


ren 


Approved For Release 2000/05/24 : CIA-RDP75-00001R0001 00410056-4.. 


’ 


5. nll igen dig adliianiieetnct igen te te Escada: 


A primary . 


Governmont, to keep us informed on new 
developments and techniques which could 
bo of us to us. On these pancis aro the 
best brains in this country, on virtually tho 
entire rango of human cndeavor. We con- 
tract for studies and rescarch projects, wher- 
ever in the United States these can best bo 
performed. 

CIA has long mado it a practico to dis- 
cuss Its evaluations of the international sit- 
uation with top mien in the civilian world. 
Wo have dono a great deal of this, but wo 
must do still more, One of my last acts 
with the Agency, for instance, was to order 
even greater interchango with tho nongov- 
ernmental experta on China. 

Question, Have you found that the spo- 
radic criticism, among the lines that spying 
Js a devious businces and that CIA operates 
without any control, has mado people re« 
luctant to work with you? 

Auswer, I have found no mensurablo re- 
luctance on these grounds, although there 


-is always the more general concern of the 


noadomic world that governmental funds and 
governmental projects must not be accom- 
panied by unwelcome controls or commit- 


all walks of life are glad to work with us in 
serving the national-security interest. The 
intelligence community finds this very grati- 
fying, because tt helps us give the President, 
the oxecutive branch, and the legislative 
branch tho very best judgmonts that the 


‘best minds in this country can arrive at. 


“UNDER FULL SCRUTINY” 


Question, Is there any other Administra- 
tion control of your operations besides the 
special National Security Council committee 
you mentioned? 

Answer. The CIA and {ts activities have 
been reviewed in detail in the past by Hoover 
Commission task forces, tho Doolittle Com- 
mittee, the Clark Committoo,-and several 
special investigating bodies for specific pur- 
poses, On ®& permanent basis, the entire 
intelligence community is under continuing 
and full scrutiny by 9 most knowledgeable 
and distinguished board of private citizens 
appointed by the President. This ts the 
President's Foreign Intelligence Advisory 
Board, first established in January of 1956 aa 
the Kililian Committee, and now under the 
chairmanship of Mr. Clark Clifford, The 
present membership includes Dr. William O, 
Baker of Bell Telephono Laboratories; Mr. 
Gordon Gray, former Special Assistant to 
President Eisenhower and onetime president 
of North Carolina University; Prof. William 
Langer of Harvard; Gen. Maxwell Taylor; Am-= 
bassador Robert Murphy, former Under Scc- 
retary of State; Mr. Frank Pace, Jr., former 
Secretary of the Army ond former Director 
of the Bureau of the Budget; Dr. Edwin Land, 


‘head of the Polaroid Corporation; Adm. John 


Sides, USN (ret.); ond Mr. Augustus Long, 
formerly the top executive of the Texas 
Company, 

This Board meets in full session about 
every six weeks, to examine in depth and 
dotail the work and tho progress of tho entire 
U.S. intelligence program. The mectings 
last two or threo days and includo compre- 
hensive discussions with tho Director and 


. his senior officers, heads of othor intelligence 


components, and senior officials of the Goy- 
ernmont who are our “customers.” 


Upon oomplotion of cach such session, the 


Board reports to tho President and makes - 


recommendations for the improvement of 
the intelligence cffort. In addition, the 
Boord-hags a number of two-man or three- 
moan panels ond subcommittees to delve more 
deeply and on 6 full-time basis into specific 
aspects and categorics of intelligence work, 


Question, What about control of your 


funds? - 


/ 
ed 
gree, : 

Pam eee: 


eit 


, Sources ia another matter, 


. the entire intelligence community. 


Answer. The Central Intelligence Agency 
budget is reviowed fully by the Bureau of 
the Budget, which requircsa the samo assure 
ances and justifications for expenditures by 
intelligence agencies that it requires from 
any other part of our Government. We are © 
not immune from detalied examination of 
our requests by the Bureau, nor pare we ex- 
empt from Its skillful pruning knife. 

Wo bavo to go to Congress for our funds, 
just Mke other agencies. The only differ- 
ence ts that, after our requests havo been 
approved by certain special congressional’ 
subcommittees, the specific appropriations 
are then lumped in for passage with other 
appropriations, to deny hostile intelligence 
services information about our activities 
which would be very useful to thom. We 
have meticulous auditing procedures to in- 
suro the tightest possible control over the 
expenditure of funds entrusted to the CIA, 

Question, In Nght of the recurring argu- 
ments about o@ so-called “watchdog commit- . 
teo” for CIA, how much Information docs 
Congress actually get-——not your Intelligence 


reports, that is, but information about your . _ - 


. a on? 
ments. On the whole, patriotic citizens in oun ees JOUR REBs eh Ane Ne 


Answer. Ever since CIA was first estab- 
Mshed, the Director has been authorized 
and in fact directed to make complete dis- 
closure of CIA activities to special subcom- 


-mittees In both the Senate and House. 


In the House, the Appropriations Com- 
mitteo and the Armed Services Committee 
each have a special subcommittee for this 
purpose. 

In the Senate, there are corresponding 
subcommittees which usually meet jointly. 

In addition, tho Director reports regularly 
to the Joint Congressional Committee on 
Atomic Energy on intelligence matters in 
that field. 

Now, when I say "complete disclosure,” I 
mean complote—ond frequent. Tho CIA is 
completely responsive to thelr questions, no 
matter how sensitive. I have discussed mat- 
ters with these special subcommittees which 
are s0 sensitive that only a small percentage 


.Of the personnel in CLA hnvo access to them. An 
‘And In case there Is any suggestion that an 


these meetings are sporadic and casual: In 
my first 12 weeks as Director I found that . 


- I was called to i7 meetings with these con- 


pressional committees. Our legislative log 
for the year 1966 shows that the Director or 
his senior aides met a total of 34 tlmes with 
the four special subcommittees, 

Question, Are they the only Congressmen 
who receive information from CIA? Intelli- 
gence, that ts, as opposed to operational 
matters? 


Answer. No, there were also 19 other com- .”,: 
mittee hearings in 1965, for instanco, to ob-, ~~ 


tain substantive intelligence from CIlA—aond 
some of these hearings ran as long as three 
full days to cover the intelligence apprecia- 
tion of the global situation, We also fre- 
quently brief individual members of Con- | 


. @ress. . 


Let me make this distinction ciear: I 
had authority to brief any congressional 
committee having a jurisdictional interest 
on substantive global intelligence, But dis- 
cussion of OFA activities, methods, and 
: Public Law 60- 
263 of 1047—that’s the National Security — 
Act—mnakes the Director of Central Intolll- ° 


Bence exclusively responsible for protecting | ee 


the security of the sources and mothods of ~ 
I was 
authorized by the President and by National 


‘Beourlty Council directives to discuss such . | 


matters only with the special subcommittees 
designated for this purpose, not with any 
others, . ; Pe Mae ee we 


- 


ft 


eS On oar et Tone Tees 


wha AEA Renate ee 


4 
a 
j 
j 


.thoy cannot answer, deny, or refute the ad- 


ad 


MNBproved For Release SUGUSISE Nein HGPSR 5oSHYABE01 oo110056-4 4 1960 


PROTECTING CIA AGENTS ato study, foreign oxperience, and then 
Question. What ie tho reason for this imi- 16 years of intelligence work, it adds up to 
tation? an impresslvo depth of knowledge, compe- 


Anawer. It is not arbitrary or bureau- tenco and oxpertise at the servico of tho na< 
eratlo—wo aro safeguarding the lives of tion. 


trusted agents and our own staff people all «I have been careful to stick to percentages, 
over tho world who contribute to our Gov- “put in actual numbers, wo could easily and 
ernment’s Intelligence objectives, adequately staf the faculty of a university 


Wo owe It to them to take every precau- with our experts. In 9 way, we do Many of 
tlon to protect them—and wo owe it to our thoso who lIcave us join tho faculties of unl- 
Government to deny hostile intelligenco versitics and colleges, Some of our person- 
services even Indirect hints or the slightest nel tnko leaves of absence to teach, and renew 
clues which might enable them to take steps their contacts with the academic world. I 


‘me out of retirement from Government serv- 


to blunt our intelligence operations, methods suppose this is only fair; our energetic re-* 


and sources, cruiting effort not only looks for tho beat 
Question. Do you mean It ts a question of young graduate students wo can find, but 

security leaks? : also picks up a few professors from time to 
Answer. I prefer to say Inadvertent dis- time. , 

closure. Even a professional Intelligenco of- Question, What about the criticism that 


ficer hne to bo alert to draw the line between. tho CIA uses “dishonorable” methods? Do 
information which helps to evaluate or au- you operate on tho principlo that the CTA, os 
thenticate a pleco of raw intelligence, and a participant in tho cold war, is justified in 
information which might polnt to the source . adopting any measures that may be used 
or the method we used to obtain it. Tho by’ the opposing governments—'fighting fire 
more people who havo both types of infor- with firo’? 


mation, the moro you multiply the chance Answer, Let’s be quite clear in our minds 
that somebody will overstep that line by - that an adversary docs not go by the Marquis 
accident. of Queensberry rules. It is a rough fight, 
Question. How damaging can such dis- . and the CIA mny have to be clandestine from 
closures be? : timo to time, but I emphatically reject the 
Answer. Well, the minute you even hint word ‘“cllshonorable.” : 


that you have information the other fellow The mon and women in CIA are, after all, 
has beon trying to keep secret, [tia one of the Americans with tho sarae ideals, the samo 
first principles of the art that he will do ethics, the samo mori codes 98 tho rest of 
everything possible to locate and destroy your the nation, I have with me a copy of a re- 
source, or disrupt your method of operation. - mark Secretary Rusk made to # press con- 
If the opposition is given any clues to help fercnes last winter, which I would Mke to 
pinpoint the source, the counterintelligence read into your record tf I may: 
job is that much easier. . "Y would emphasize io you that CIA fa not 
INFORMATION FOR CONGRESS ongnge | in activitics not known to the senior 
Question. Have the special CIA subcom~ policy »Mcers of the Government, But you 
miltecs In Congress expressed any dissatis- should also bear in mind that beneath the 
faction over the years that they were not level vf public discussion, there Is & tough 
getting enough information? struggic going on kn the back alleys ail over 
Answer. We have never withheld any in- the world, It's a tough one, it's unpleasant, 
formation, substantive or operational, from and no one likes it, but that is not a field 


the four special subcommittecs. On somo which can be left entiely to the othor alde. . ; 


occasions, in fact, they have asked us not to And 60, onco ‘in 1. while, some disagreeable 


give them the identities of very sensitive things happen, arid I can tell you that there j -: 
sources, because they did not wish to know, 1s a good denl of gallantry and « high degreo oi 
and wo have complied. If you refer to dis~ 4,0 competence In those who have to help us | 
entisfaction with the amount of information ‘deol with that part of the struggle for free- «| : 


which wo haye—rather than the amount we dom.” , 


givo them—no professional intelligence oper- And President Johnson, when he swore mo ‘4 
ation anywhere in the world ts ever satisfied {n as Director of Central Intelligence on; 


with the extent of Its knowledge, and theso April 28, 1065, put 1t this way: 

gentlemen have been working with us long on a 
enough so that they have probably acquircd We have committed our lives, our prop 
this same professional dissatisfaction. 


criticism on your own personnel? 

Answer. I think it ja an: cloquent testi- 
monial to the dedication of the peopio in 
CIA that the criticism has not affected their 
morale. Bear in mind that, by our rules, 


“would disgrace all tho sacrifices Americans 
day vigtlant against every threat to peace 


yerao comment, even when it ts patently and **8! Intelligence Agency.” 


sometimes viclously false. Add to that the _ Question. Just what are the duties of the © 


gravo responsibilities for the nation's sccu- Director of CIA?” 


rity, the pressure, the anonymity of achicve- Answer, The National Security Act of 1047 °°) -, 
ment, and the constant need for security created the position of Director of Central ji 
alertness—it is a source of pride, and noth- ‘Tntelligenco, or DCT, for short, The DCI j .. 
ing short of amazement, that we keep our ‘46 not only the Director of CIA—ho 16 also | 


people, and keep getting more good ones. ‘first and foremost the principal adviser on 


I asked recently for some statistics on how forcign intelligence to the President and the . |- 


long our personnel had been with us. Tho ‘National Security Council, And he is also 


answers showed that more than a quarter of chairman of the United ‘States Intelligence ° 
our professional personnel—as differdntiated Board, or USIB, which brings together the < 


from the clertcal—had been with CIA more entiro intelligence community, 


than 16 years, ond thot an astounding 77 per Question. Now that you have just left the, | 
cent hod 10 yours or more of intelligence ex- Central Intelligence Agency after more than “\'« 
perience, About 16 per cent have graduate “14 monthe as Director, what is your opinion “| 


degrees; 5 per cent have tho doctorate. of the Agency? 


When you consider only the analysts who Answor., Excellent. It is the finest organi~ « 
have tho direct responsibility in headquar- zation I havo over been.associated with.. The “- 
ters for analysis of a foreign oroa, alx out of people ot CIA ore dedicated, loyal and highly -. 
10 of them had Mved, worked or traveled capable. I found the Agency well up to ite 
abroad even before they came to OIA, When exacting requirements as our first line of : 
you combine all the years required for gradu- national defense. — : : ‘ aoe 


x ” . ‘ 3 7 c a a 
Gs ans hg a 

st rene 
” 


C 


Approved For Releasé 2000/05/24 : CIA-RDP75-00001R000100110056-4" 


erty, our resources and our sacred honor to 


: tho freedom and peace of other men, indeed, - 
Question. What about the effect of the -to the freedom and pence of oll mankind. : 


’ We would dishonor that commitment, we ‘| 


have made, if we were not every hour of every : 


ck et ae a a te Mi tn 
~ 


and freedom. That is' why we have the Cen- -) 


“needed. He told me I could serve six montha, 


AFTER DOMINICAN CRISIS 


Question, Why aro you leaving now? 
Answer. When President Johnson called 


ice, I asked him first how long I would bo 


or a-year, or as long os he was in office, or 
until I was satisficd with certain adminis- 
trative tasks, including, in particular, long- 
range planning. 

I’m taking the fourth option, but I also 
came close to the one-year hitch. Actually, 
tho President had had my resignation in 
hand for about three weeks when he an- 
nounced it. I came tn with the Dominican 
crisis; and you might say it behooved mo to 
stay until peaceful elections brought a duly 
constituted Government Into being. 

Question, Admiral Raborn, what are you 
going to do now? 


Answer, I plan to take a short rest and 
then return to American industry with tho 
Aerojet-General Corporation, 


PPT ee ate en Ce TET Se Soe 


SEE Ch, OOsite te Dy 
Fb ed TL eae? 
‘a a Meer cise eat i 


Pte MIE eae third 


Lay ey 
rode pati, 
ge esyanb tis 


cep de va 


seh ty 
afm We 
“ {erat} . uy 


ai ayers 


Son 


5 Sy ty: 


