Approved For Rele 


i secreT[ _i 


25X1 


ae 
A 


9 July 1980 


a aaa etal 


MEMORANDUM FOR: Special Assistant to the DCI for Compartmentation 
| FROM: Director of Central Intelligence 
SUBJECT: 


Conversation with Warren Christopher, ee Secretary 
of State, 8 July 1980 


1. I explained my position on tial: “lnontaisenosurs agreement pretty 
much as per the talking points you prepared. The key paint in the presenta- 
. tion was that OGC interprets the present Form 4066 (Non-disclosure Agreement 
@ Sensitive Compartmented Information) as supporting a Snepp-type action against 
the signer. The DepSecState wanted to check this with his lawyers. He had 
not understood that there was this close a similarity between the existing 
agreements State Department employees sign and those which we do. (It is 
not clear to me whether by a "Snepp-type action" we mean that we could prosecute 
under Form 4066 when an employee publishes without prior clearance or whether — 


we can prosecute when an employee discloses sensitive compartmented infor- . 
25X14 mation through pub] ication. [ 


2. The DepSecState's overall objection is simply that when an individual 
comes into the intelligence profession he recognizes the inhibitions that go 
with it. In contrast, many of the individuals who come into the State Department 
are academic and other types who very naturally will publish in the future course 
of their lives. I pointed out to him that we were asking for a more narrow non- 


i 
disclosure agreement here than was applied to the intelligence professionals 
25X1 inthe CIA, 


3. The DepSecState wanted to check with his lawyers on our interpretation 
of the implications of Form 4066. He also wanted to check with Muskie on the 


morale impact on the State Department (assuming that this is not truly an 
extensi 


f 4066). Hold the implementing directive until I hear further from 
25X1 him. L_ 


State Dept. review completed ... Saray + 
ee a 
rt - 

cc: DDCI 


General Counsel 
OGC Has Reviewed 


A-RDPe*@eCt0 TRU 2300380003-6 


SECRET 
Approved For R afar am: 


