AGENDA 

OF THE CITY COUNCIL 
CITY OF EAST GRAND FORKS 
TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 1, 2020 - 5:00 PM 


CALL TO ORDER: 

CALL OF ROLL: 

DETERMINATION OF A QUORUM: 

PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE: 

APPROVAL OF MINUTES: 

1. Consider approving the minutes of the “Work Session” for the East Grand Forks, Minnesota City 
Council from August 12, 2020. 

2. Consider approving the minutes of the “Regular Council Meeting” for the East Grand Forks Minnesota 
City Council from August 18, 2020. 

SCHEDULED BID LETTINGS: NONE 

SCHEDULED PUBLIC HEARINGS: NONE 

CONSENT AGENDA: 

Items under the “Consent Agenda ” will be adopted with one motion; however, council members may 

request individual items to be pulled from the consent agenda for discussion and action if they choose. 

3. Consider approving the Agreement for Professional Services between the City of East Grand Forks 
and AE2S for the repairs and rehabilitation of manholes 1-246 and 1-247 for a total of $7,260. 

4. Consider approving the service agreement between the City of East Grand Forks and the Minnesota 
Municipal Utilities Association for the Safety Management Program split 50/50 between the City and 
the Water and Light Department for October 1, 2020 through September 30, 2021. 

ACKNOWLEDGE RECEIPT OF REPORTS OF OFFICERS, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS: 

5. Regular meeting minutes of the Water, Light, Power, and Building Commission for August 5, 2020 
and closed minute summary for August 12, 2020. 

COMMUNICATIONS: NONE 

OLD BUSINESS: NONE 


Individuals with disabilities, language barriers or other needs who plan to attend the meeting and will need special accommodations 
should contact Nancy Ellis, ADA Coordinator at (218)-773-2208. Please contact us at least 48 hours before the meeting to give our staff 
adequate time to make arrangements. Also, materials can be provided in alternative formats for people with disabilities or with limited 
English proficiency (LEP) by contacting the ADA Coordinator (218)-773-2208 five (5) days prior to the meeting. 


1 



NEW BUSINESS: 


6. Consider awarding the French Drain project to RJ Zavoral and Sons for a total of $41,415.70. 

7. Consider adopting Resolution No. 20-09-54 approving the agreement between the City of East Grand 
Forks and Polk County allowing the City to be eligible for CARES Act funding for elections. 

8. Consider adopting Resolution No. 20-09-55 approving the promotion of Josh Krostue to Lead 
Equipment Operator at a salary of $27.28 per hour. 

9. Consider adopting Resolution No. 20-09-56 approving the promotion of Travis Rambel to Equipment 
Operator at a salary of $22.34 per hour. 

10. Consider approving the request to start a new hiring register for the position of Police Officer. 

11. Consider approving the Facility Use Agreement between the City of East Grand Forks and the Arts 
and Crafts Council for the use of the Civic Center for the Arts and Crafts Show for October 2-4, 2020. 

CLAIMS: 

12. Consider authorizing the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer to issue payment of recommended bills 
and payroll. 

COUNCIL/STAFF REPORTS: 

ADJOURN: 


Upcoming Meetings: 

Work Session - Tuesday, September 8, 2020 - 5:00 PM 
Regular Council Meeting - Tuesday, September 15, 2020 - 5:00 PM 
Work Session - Tuesday, September 22, 2020 - 5:00 PM 
Regular Council Meeting - Tuesday, October 6, 2020 - 5:00 PM 


Individuals with disabilities, language barriers or other needs who plan to attend the meeting and will need special accommodations 
should contact Nancy Ellis, ADA Coordinator at (218)-773-2208. Please contact us at least 48 hours before the meeting to give our staff 
adequate time to make arrangements. Also, materials can be provided in alternative formats for people with disabilities or with limited 
English proficiency (LEP) by contacting the ADA Coordinator (218)-773-2208 five (5) days prior to the meeting. 


2 



#1 


UNAPPROVED MINUTES 
OF THE CITY 
COUNCIL WORK SESSION 
CITY OF EAST GRAND FORKS 
WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 12, 2020 - 5:00 PM 


CALL TO ORDER: 

The Work Session of the East Grand Forks City Council for Wednesday, August 12, 2020 was called to 
order by Council President Olstad at 5:00 P.M. 

CALL OF ROLL: 

On a Call of Roll the following members of the East Grand Forks City Council were present: Mayor Steve 
Gander, Council President Mark Olstad, Council Vice-President Chad Grassel, Council Members 
Clarence Vetter, Dale Helms, and Tim Riopelle. 

DETERMINATION OF A QUORUM: 

The Council President Determined a Quorum was present. 

1. Regional Market Capture Results -Mark Shill 

Mr. Gorte explained this activity was done through the Chamber, it included a group of organizations 
along with East Grand Forks Economic Development, and it was done to review what has happened in 
the retail market, what could be happening in the future, and what can be done locally to help businesses. 
He stated Mr. Shill would be reviewing the information. 

Mr. Shill stated this project was done as a partnership and was led by the Chamber, how there has been a 
decline in retail over the last five years but this decline has brought this back to the same number of jobs 
as five years ago. He explained there was a peak in December of 2014, the data shows a boom and then 
a bust, and it shows that there has been a small increase. He reviewed information regarding the value of 
Canadian currency because when it is close to the US dollar in value there is a big impact. He said there 
were familiar trends happening in Fargo, the number of jobs were about the same as 10 years ago, and 
reviewed external factors that include the exchange rate, poor agricultural earnings, and people being laid 
off. He added there was no way the City would have been able to stop Shopko from closing and there is 
a dominance of big box stores. He compared the region to the nation, this region did have a peak in 2014, 
but even though there has been a decline, it was still above the national average. 

Mr. Shill explained they reviewed the different industries, where it ranks compared to the national average, 
the growth or lack thereof over the last five years, and how there was a big decline in non-store retailers 
which they believed was Amazon because many of their employees changed to independent contractors. 
He added the other areas where things are growing is manufacturing, the number of jobs is almost up to 
the national average, Polk County is very strong in manufacturing with being 40% over the national 
average, and this had helped increase average weekly earnings. 


3 



Work Session 


August 11, 2020 


Mr. Shill said when they started this project there were three goals that included improving the quality of 
life for current and future residents, sustain a strong commercial tax base in the region, and attract more 
visitors. He stated there were five themes that helped guide the work that included supporting decisions 
with data, focus on new and enhanced experiences, leverage the university institution and its people, 
identify underserved niche opportunities, and communicate with the public. He continued with an action 
plan, who this area is serving, and they looked into whom this area is serving. He stated there were 71 
different categories and the different groups of people that come to the City come for different reasons or 
industries. He added they decided a report was not going to help but having tools would so there were 
tools available right now on The Chamber’s website for businesses to use. He continued with graphs that 
showed impacts to business when there was a large event being held. 

Mr. Shill stated local operators need to be supported, they had services available to assist businesses, and 
how these businesses may need to innovate. He said another step is to increase visitation and promote 
experiences and added there is also a component that will be geared to the local population as well. He 
said the last piece was looking at policies and resources with having the local governments being the 
connector or facilitator, adapting policies and programs, and inviting targeted operators to the community. 

Mr. Shill said there were external impacts that have been affecting retail, there was a boom and then a 
bust, but there are still more retail jobs in Grand Forks than the national average. He reviewed how wages 
are rising, they are many small takeaways from this information, and there are niche opportunities. He 
explained there is a five-step action platform, they are working outreach to implement these tools, 
targeting research for businesses that are interested, and they will continue working with groups in the 
community, and they will also be looking at outside operators. He said this was a quick summary, he 
asked if there were any questions, and to let them know if there was anything they could do to help. Mr. 
Gorte said meetings have been set up to figure out a way to send out the information to local businesses. 

2. Discussion Regarding CARES Act Funding - Karla Anderson & Paul Gorte 

Mr. Gorte reminded the Council the CARES Act provided funding to local governments and schools, the 
City’s share is $668,000, the funds are to be used for COVID related expenses, and the funds can be shared 
among different jurisdictions. He stated they have already started talking with Polk County on how they 
can maximize the impacts for the use of these dollars. He said City expenses at this point were 
approximately $250,000 and the remaining funds could be used to assist businesses and individuals that 
have been harmed by COVID. He added the Economic Development Authority (EDA) Board has 
discussed if there is funding available it can be used to reimburse businesses for their expenses regarding 
COVID. He said they would have to provide receipts and asked Ms. Anderson to speak about the schools. 

Ms. Anderson informed the Council the school’s estimated costs are $599,000, they are expecting 
$223,000, and 20% of that funding was supposed to be shared with the private schools. She said Sacred 
Heart has spent $12,000 at this time, they are in need of Chromebooks, and the cost of the Chromebooks 
would come from the 20% of shared funding. She added she had called Riverside Christian School but 
was not able to reach anyone at this time. She said they are trying to determine what the need is and where 
the possible funding could come from before dispersing funds to individual businesses. 

Mr. Gorte stated he had sent out a survey to try to gage what expenses might be along with lost revenues, 
expenses have ranged from nothing to $41,000, and lost revenues have been estimated up to $200,000. 
He said they would be better off reimbursing just for expenses based on receipts. Council President Olstad 
asked if these funds could only reimburse COVID related expenses and not cover lost income. Mr. Gorte 

2 I P a g e 


4 



Work Session 


August 11, 2020 


said the information from the State shows it can also be used for lost income but it would be difficult to 
determine what the lost income could be which is why he and the EDA Board were suggesting 
reimbursements for expenses based on receipts. Ms. Anderson said if there was funding available the City 
could help with lost revenues, help pay rent, or help with debt payments. She said to be fair and the easiest 
thing to do at this time would be to reimburse for expenses and see how much funding is available after 
that. Mr. Gorte said they could also help individuals as well. 

Council President Olstad said they need to see what expenses the City has up to November 15 th and make 
sure they are addressed. He stated he would like to make sure the City’s expenses have been covered, not 
use any reserves for COVID costs, and again make sure all costs are covered up until November 15 th . He 
asked to look at all possible expenses. Ms. Anderson informed the Council she is working with each 
departments to make sure they have things covered or determine what is needed to make sure the City is 
covered. Council President Olstad stated he is glad they are looking into things. 

Mayor Gander said being able to anticipate future costs is very important, the air quality in arenas is more 
important than ever, and reviewed a grant program that North Dakota is offering. He explained programs 
are allowing businesses to stay resilient, he thinks that some of these COVID funds should be available to 
businesses in the City, and allow them to purchase and do what is needed for their business. Council 
member Helms said there was only around $400,000 left after city expenses and they should just use funds 
for COVID related expenses because these funds can only go so far. Ms. Anderson said they did not get 
much of a response from the survey so they do not know what the numbers are but there are funds that 
may be coming from the County because the City knows the businesses better in the community than the 
County does. Council member Riopelle said programs offered by the State and Federal Government did 
not include all small businesses. He asked for a more defined plan and the total amount of funds that 
could be given to each business. He commented how businesses are already cutting costs to try to make 
ends meet, some businesses have had plenty of help, and he would like to see a plan before allowing any 
funds to be release to the EDA. 

Mayor Gander said the EDA will need guidance from the Council, he expects $100,000 up to $300,000 
given to the EDA to help businesses, and time is needed to allow businesses to apply for funding. Ms. 
Anderson said they would have more information after meeting with Polk County later in the week. 

3. Consider Street Repair to 20 th Street NW - Jason Stordahl 

Mr. Stordahl stated 20 th Street was not in the best condition and there are areas where frost boils have 
pushed up the asphalt. He explained he had met with Mayor Gander, Council President Olstad, Council 
member Riopelle, and Mr. Emery to review the street and discussed how to repair some of the areas. He 
stated they discussed repairs, long-term plans, short-term plans, and Mayor Gander requested estimates 
for a temporary repair. He informed the Council the temporary repair would include digging out the areas 
that are pushed up, put down geogrid fabric, and add 16 inches of crushed concrete. He said he had 
received two estimates and if the Council moves forward with this, he recommended moving forward with 
RJ Zavoral and Sons because they had the lower quote. 

Mayor Gander commented the Council knows where things stand on this street, the best thing for these 
streets is a street replacement, the request would need to come from the neighborhood, and at this time 
that request is not coming forward because of the potential for high special assessments. He stated the 
Council cannot let this street just disappear either. He continued saying the hope with this temporary fix 
that will go deep enough that this may be a limited base for a future project. Council member Helms said 

3 I P a g e 


5 



Work Session 


August 11, 2020 


it is in favor of this temporary fix, the rest of the City has paid for their own streets, he does not think the 
City should replace the complete street, but this street has become dangerous. 

Council member Vetter said it is okay with this if it is a one-time thing but he is getting the impression 
another project will be done each year. He said he rather take the $12,000 and hire an assessor to complete 
an appraisal of homes of what they would be before and after the street replacement would be completed. 
He added he expects the values would increase significantly and possibly cover the total assessment of 
the street replacement. He commented how the City would then be able to redo the road. Mayor Gander 
said the appraisal process for this area is in the works and if depending on the costs, it may need to be 
voted on by the Council. 

This item will be referred to a City Council Meeting for action. 

4. Consider Rhinehart Road Repair - Jason Stordahl 

Mr. Stordahl told the Council Rhinehart Dr SE from Greenway Boulevard out to the city limits to the 
south has a few frost boils have caused issues with the road. He explained he also talked with Rhinehart 
Township because they own a portion of the road that is affected by these frost boils and the City would 
split the costs with Rhinehart Township for some of the repair work. He stated there were three areas to 
be repaired, he had received a couple estimates, and RJ Zavoral and Sons had the low quote. He added 
the Rhinehart Township has approved to complete the road repair that affect their portion of the road and 
he asked to have all three locations repaired on Rhinehart Drive. He said the repair is necessary but in the 
future when there is more development the road will be lowered. He added they do not know when that 
will be and these repairs will keep the road passible. Mayor Gander asked if there was funding available. 
Mr. Stordahl said there were funds available for this repair. 

This item will be referred to a City Council Meeting for action. 

5. Discussion on Recreation Improvement & Facilities Plan - Reid Huttunen 

Mr. Huttunen said he has taken the results from the surveys, looked at what kind of projects could be done, 
and would like to create a master plan of what can be done with the facilities. He stated he would like to 
have fundraising started when there would be a chance to go back to the State Legislature to request a 
local sales tax, which will show the State there is local support for this. He started by summarizing the 
goals, the survey results have designated some higher priorities for the facilities to make every effort to 
make these year round facilities if possible to be used for many different functions. 

Mr. Huttunen started reviewing the priorities for the arenas, the highest was repairing and renovating the 
Civic Center and the next highest priority was to keep the VFW Arena as an ice Arena. He said that was 
followed by considering potential improvements to the Blue Line Arena, which was not included in the 
first study and improving sight lines and temperature control of the building could go a long way. He 
continued with improvements at the baseball complex; the Stauss Park complex had been included in the 
sales tax information, and lastly improving facilities and usability for as many groups as possible. He 
reviewed the project outcomes showing what they would like to achieve. He continued reviewing what 
needed to be done at the arenas for improvements and the main reason for this project was to replace the 
R22 ice plants in the Civic Center and VFW Arenas. He reviewed the possible projects for the arenas and 
included possibly improvements of the Blue Line Arena. 

4 I P a g e 


6 



Work Session 


August 11, 2020 


Mr. Huttunen continued with the cost estimates, they are using 2021 cost estimates done by JLG, this 
gives a good idea of what will be needed, how the base price at the Civic Center would total $5.7 million 
and what alternate options there are that include a locker rooms addition. He added these costs might 
change when they get to a design concept and how the base price includes the items that have to be 
replaced so it did not include replacing the air handler system. 

Mr. Huttunen reviewed the cost estimates for the VFW Arena, the base priority total is $5.3 million, and 
what the alternate options which include an addition joining the two arenas together. He stated how this 
space could include locker rooms, they could share an ice plant, and this was not a design but to give an 
idea of what could be done in this space. He then reviewed the Blue Line Arena, updates to the ice plant 
could help in the future, and adding a heat source had an estimated cost of $30,000. He said he had started 
discussion with the Blue Line Club to see if they could help fundraise for a heat source. He added currently 
the base estimates for the arenas totals around $ 11 and adding the alternate options could add another 
$7.47 million to the total. 

Mr. Huttunen continued with Stauss Park, it was second overall of priorities, and most would like to see 
improved drainage, lighting of the fields, and improvement of the field to allow for longer seasonal use. 
He said Parks and Recreation Staff sat down with current and former users of the ball fields and asked 
what they would like to see. He stated the most important was improved drainage of the field and drainage 
of the infield. He said that was a realistic goal. He added another goal would be to reconstruct the other 
field and see where funding could come from for the improvements to the second field. He said adding 
turf to these fields would allow them to be ready sooner and possibly become a regional destination for 
teams in the area if they have trouble in their own fields. He said there was a possibility of hosting college 
games, which could boost use of the fields and revenue as well. He reviewed the cost estimates of both 
fields, which would be $2.95 million, he asked everyone to be open-minded during this planning phase, 
and to continue to work as a community to seek sponsors, donations, and grants to help with these costs. 

Mr. Huttunen stated the next steps he is looking for is feedback from the Council on the projects and 
priorities, organizing a task force to set fundraising goals, and have things in place when requesting the 
sales tax. Council member Helms commented the goals have been set high; he did have some questions, 
but needed to do some research before asking them. Mayor Gander said they are still working through 
priorities, priorities will be drilled down, and they do not know how much will be coming in for 
sponsorships and donations. He added it starts big, they will work on the scope, and he appreciated what 
has been done. Council member Helms asked if the Blue Line Arena should be changed into the multi¬ 
purpose facility with the VFW Arena staying an arena. Mr. Huttunen said he would be willing to study 
this further to see if there is a space that could be used as a multi-purpose center and there would need to 
be a programing discussion. Council President Olstad told Mr. Huttunen to keep moving forward. 

This item will be brought back to a future work session. 

6. Request to Replace Compressor Control Panel at VFW Arena - Reid Huttunen 

Mr. Huttunen said there were two control panels, one for each compressor, and the current computer 
system they run on has not been supported for at least 10 years. He explained he was able to find a panel 
that could be retrofitted to fit the current compressor system, he received quotes from Johnson Controls 
and SIMCO Refrigeration, and Johnson Controls is the direct supplier of the panel. He recommended 
replacing both panels because each compressor has to be used throughout the year. He told the Council 
he did not budget for this project because he was not aware of this product until this year. He stated after 

5 I P a g e 


7 



Work Session 


August 11, 2020 


speaking with Ms. Anderson, it was suggested to use CARES dollars for this expense because it would 
allow remote access and could qualify for work place mitigation. He added since putting the RCA together 
he spoke with Ms. Anderson again and determined there were still building maintenance funds for this, 
which were available. 

Council member Helms asked if these control panels be used if there are updates done at the VFW Arena. 
Mr. Huttunen said no because they would not work with a new system. Council member Helms asked if 
they had checked with Digi-key for parts because of the number of parts they have available. Mr. Huttunen 
said he was not sure, Johnson Controls owns Frick, he is not sure who their supplier was, and up to this 
point, Eagle Electric had been very helpful with finding replacement parts for the old panels, and they are 
not able to find old or replacement parts anymore. 

This item will be referred to a City Council Meeting for action. 

7. Consider Request for September Ice Install at VFW Arena - Reid Huttunen 

Mr. Huttunen stated because of COVID the June hockey camps were canceled, it was requested if things 
were opening back up to see if the camp could be held, and he did not want anything to interfere with the 
Arts and Crafts show. He said if the Arts and Crafts show is held it will be limited to the Civic Center so 
the Blue Line Club has requested to have ice starting Monday, September 14 th through October 9 th at the 
VFW Arena. He explained they would be renting the building; the proposed price is $350 per day, which 
would cover the City’s costs and operation of the building. 

Council Vice-President Grassel asked if the ice would be left on or taken off. Mr. Huttunen said they 
would leave the ice because ice is usually installed around October 10 th and it would be left for the duration 
of the season. Council member Riopelle asked if the additional ice time would be rented out. Mr. 
Huttunen said that would be up to the Council, what they have done before is it is all rented to the Blue 
Line Club, and they would sublease it out to others if they chose to. 

This item will be referred to a City Council Meeting for action. 

8. Discussion on Proposed 2021 Budget - Karla Anderson 

Ms. Anderson explained the information had been sent out does not include a cost of living increase, it 
shows a negative $638,000, which was mostly capital improvements, personnel costs with steps were at 
about 5% increase, the fund balance increased over $500,000 at the end of 2019, and if they used funds 
from the fund balance, the fund balance would still be at 49% of revenue or 47% of expenses. She 
commented that was within the guidelines, currently they are over the recommendations for the fund 
balance, and they kept the increase at 3%, which was the average over the last six years. She reminded 
everyone how that 3% did not mean everyone’s taxes were going up 3% and it was dependent on new 
builds that were added into the tax base and improvements to properties. 

Mr. Murphy said one of the main things they would like from the Council is a levy number for staff to 
work with. Council President Olstad stated the City’s local government aid was cut so that is already 
starting the out in the hole; the Mayor would not go more than 5%, so at this time they are looking at 
3.25%, which could be hard to get down to. He said he was not sure if they could continue with what they 
had been doing, there was still union negotiations that needed to be completed, and they need to determine 
where they truly want to be. Mr. Murphy said he would be sending out the notices to start negotiations 

6 I P a g e 


8 



Work Session 


August 11, 2020 


with unions. Council President Olstad said they have been here before, it will take work to get things to 
where they need to be, and he does not want the reserves to dip down because they work hard to get things 
there. He added again, there were no costs that should be covered by the CARES Act funds to be passed 
on to the residents. 

Mayor Gander said last year the budgeted was short approximately $200,000, which was going to be taken 
care of by reserves and asked what the carryover was going to be from 2020. Ms. Anderson stated it was 
hard to determine because revenues were down but expenses are also down. She said $77,000 had been 
budgeted for travel at currently there was $68,000 remaining so she was not sure where things will end up 
at the end of the year. Mr. Murphy said some personnel costs are down also compared to previous years, 
he was not sure if that was going to continue, and if the trend continued, there would be savings in 
personnel costs. Mayor Gander said each year revenues keep coming in and departments are being run 
efficiently leaving funds left over at the end of the year. He asked to change the 3% to 5% at this time as 
a starting point and they will be working on keeping the increase to the rate of inflation. Council Vice- 
President Grassel asked how long the union contracts were. Mr. Murphy said they were three-year 
contracts but included a reopener because of the wage study that was being completed. He added all 
contracts expire at the end of this year. 

Ms. Anderson asked for clarification on changing the 3% to the 5%. Mayor Gander said yes and how the 
goal each year is to keep the increase the same as the rate of inflation. He added if they keep the increase 
artificially low and using reserves, they will eventually need to replenish the reserves again. He said they 
are trying to be as responsible and efficiently as they can 

ADJOURN: 

A MOTION WAS MADE BY COUNCIL MEMBER HELMS, SECONDED BY COUNCIL 
MEMBER RIOPELLE, TO ADJOURN THE AUGUST 12,2020 WORK SESSION OF THE EAST 
GRAND FORKS, MINNESOTA CITY COUNCIL AT 6:36 P.M. 

Voting Aye: Olstad, Grassel, Vetter, Helms, and Riopelle. 

Voting Nay: None. 

Absent: Johnson and DeMers. 


David Murphy, City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer 


7 I P a g e 


9 



#2 


UNAPPROVED MINUTES 
OF THE CITY COUNCIL 
CITY OF EAST GRAND FORKS 
TUESDAY, AUGUST 18, 2020 - 5:00 PM 

CALL TO ORDER: 


The Council Meeting of the East Grand Forks City Council for Tuesday, August 18, 2020 was ccdled to 
order by Council President Olstad at 5:00 P.M. 

CALL OF ROLL: 


On a Ccdl of Roll the following members of the East Grand Forks City Council were present: Mayor Steve 
Gander, Council President Mark Olstad, Council Vice-President Chad Grassel, Council Members 
Clarence Vetter, Dcde Helms, Tim Riopelle, Tim Johnson, and Marc DeMers. 

DETERMINATION OF A QUORUM: 

The Council President Determined a Quorum was present. 

PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE: 

APPROVAL OF MINUTES: 

1. Consider approving the minutes of the “Work Session” for the City of East Grand Forks, Minnesota 
City Council from July 28, 2020. 

2. Consider approving the minutes of the “Regular Council Meeting” for the East Grand Forks, 
Minnesota City Council from August 4, 2020. 

A MOTION WAS MADE BY COUNCIL MEMBER HELMS, SECONDED BY COUNCIL 
MEMBER RIOPELLE, TO APPROVE THE MINUTES OF THE “WORK SESSION’ FOR THE 
CITY COUNCIL OF EAST GRAND FORKS OF JULY 28, 2020. 

Voting Aye: Riopelle, Johnson, Olstad, Grassel, DeMers, Vetter, and Helms. 

Voting Nay: None. 

A MOTION WAS MADE BY COUNCIL MEMBER GRASSEL, SECONDED BY COUNCIL 
MEMBER JOHNSON, TO APPROVE THE “REGULAR COUNCIL MEETING” FOR THE 
EAST GRAND FORKS, MINNESOTA CITY COUNCIL FROM AUGUST 4, 2020. 

Voting Aye: Riopelle, Johnson, Olstad, Grassel, DeMers, Vetter, and Helms. 

Voting Nay: None. 

SCHEDULED BID LETTINGS: NONE. 

SCHEDULED PUBLIC HEARINGS: NONE 
CONSENT AGENDA: NONE 


10 



City Council Meeting August 18, 2020 

ACKNOWLEDGE RECEIPT OF REPORTS OF OFFICERS, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS: 


3. Regular meeting minutes of the Water, Light, Power and Building Commission for July 15, 2020. 

4. Regular meeting minutes of the Cemetery Commission for October 30, 2019. 

COMMUNICATIONS: NONE 
OLD BUSINESS: NONE 
NEW BUSINESS: 

5. Consider adopting Resolution No. 20-08-50 approving the hiring of Denise Adams as Administrative 
Assistant/Dispatcher/Jailer position at a salary of $20.98 per hour. 

A MOTION WAS MADE BY COUNCIL MEMBER JOHNSON, SECONDED BY COUNCIL 
MEMBER VETTER, TO ADOPT RESOLUTION NO. 20-08-50 APPROVING THE HIRING OF 
DENISE ADAMS AS ADMINISTRATIVE ASSISTANT/DISPATCHER/JAILER POSITION AT 
A SALARY OF $20.98 PER HOUR. 

Voting Aye: Riopelle, Johnson, Olstad, Grassel, DeMers, Vetter, and Helms. 

Voting Nay: None. 

6. Consider adopting Resolution No. 20-08-51 approving the hiring of Jake Schiller as a Police Officer 
at a salary of $28.75 per hour contingent upon the condition he successfully complete the final steps 
of the hiring process which includes the background investigation, psychological evaluation, medical 
evaluation and successfully passing the MN POST Reciprocity Exam. 

A MOTION WAS MADE BY COUNCIL MEMBER JOHNSON, SECONDED BY COUNCIL 
MEMBER GRASSEL, TO ADOPT RESOLUTION NO. 20-08-51 APPROVING JAKE 
SCHILLER AS A POLICE OFFICER AT A SALARY OF $28.75 PER HOUR. 

Voting Aye: Riopelle, Johnson, Olstad, Grassel, DeMers, Vetter, and Helms. 

Voting Nay: None. 

7. Consider adopting Resolution No. 20-08-52 approving the hiring of Brittney Neil as a Police Officer 
at a salary of $26.48 per hour contingent upon the condition that she successfully complete the final steps 
of the hiring process which includes the background investigation, psychological evaluation, medical 
evaluation and successfully passing the MN POST Exam. 

A MOTION WAS MADE BY COUNCIL MEMBER JOHNSON, SECONDED BY COUNCIL 
MEMBER GRASSEL, TO ADOPT RESOLUTION NO. 20-08-52 APPROVING BRITTNEY NEIL 
AS A POLICE OFFICER AT A SALARY OF $26.48 PER HOUR. 

Voting Aye: Riopelle, Johnson, Olstad, Grassel, DeMers, Vetter, and Helms. 

Voting Nay: None. 

2 I P a g e 


11 



City Council Meeting August 18, 2020 

8. Consider awarding the 20 th Street NW Repair project to RJ Zavoral and Sons for a total of $12,750. 


A MOTION WAS MADE BY COUNCIL MEMBER RIOPELLE, SECONDED BY COUNCIL 
MEMBER HELMS, TO AWARD THE 20 th STREET NW REPAIR PROJECT TO RJ ZAVORAL 
AND SONS FOR A TOTAL OF $12,750. 


Voting Aye: Riopelle, Johnson, Olstad, Grassel, Vetter, and Helms. 
Voting Nay: None. 

Abstain: DeMers. 


9. Consider awarding the total project with all three options for the Rhinehart Drive SE Repair to RJ 
Zavoral and Sons for a total of $36,500 and enter into an agreement between the City of East Grand 
Forks and Rhinehart Township to pay for this project with the City paying $21,892.50 and Rhinehart 
Township paying $14,607.50 for their portion of the roadway. 


A MOTION WAS MADE BY COUNCIL MEMBER GRASSEL, SECONDED BY COUNCIL 
MEMBER HELMS, TO AWARD THE TOTAL PROJECT WITH ALL THREE OPTIONS FOR 
THE RHINEHART DRIVE SE REPAIR TO RJ ZAVORAL AND SONS FOR A TOTAL OF 
$36,500 AND ENTER INTO AN AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE CITY OF EAST GRAND 
FORKS AND RHINEHART TOWNSHIP TO PAY FOR THIS PROJECT WITH THE CITY 
PAYING $21,892.50 AND RHINEHART TOWNSHIP PAYING $14,607.50 FOR THEIR 
PORTION OF THE ROADWAY. 


Voting Aye: Riopelle, Johnson, Olstad, Grassel, Vetter, and Helms. 
Voting Nay: None. 

Abstain: DeMers. 


10. Consider approving the Facility Use Agreement between the City of East Grand Forks and the East 
Grand Forks Blue Line Club for use of the VFW Arena from September 14 th to October 9 th for a rental 
fee of $9,250. 


A MOTION WAS MADE BY COUNCIL MEMBER GRASSEL, SECONDED BY COUNCIL 
MEMBER RIOPELLE, TO APPROVE THE FACILITY USE AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE 
CITY OF EAST GRAND FORKS AND THE EAST GRAND FORKS BLUE LINE CLUB FOR 
USE OF THE VFW ARENA FROM SEPTEMBER 14 th TO OCTOBER 9 th FOR A RENTAL 
FEE OF $9,250. 


Voting Aye: Riopelle, Johnson, Olstad, Grassel, DeMers, Vetter, and Helms. 

Voting Nay: None. 

11. Consider approving the replacement of both compressor control panels at the VFW Arena by Johnson 
Controls for a total of $40,690.00 with the electrical work to be completed by Eagle Electric for a total 
of $1,428.00 with the funds for this project coming from the Building Maintenance Fund. 

A MOTION WAS MADE BY COUNCIL MEMBER RIOPELLE, SECONDED BY COUNCIL 
MEMBER HELMS, TO APPROVE THE REPLACEMENT OF BOTH COMPRESSOR 


3 I P a g e 


12 



City Council Meeting 


August 18, 2020 


CONTROL PANELS AT THE VFW ARENA BY JOHNSON CONTROLS FOR A TOTAL OF 
$40,690.00 WITH THE ELECTRICAL WORK TO BE COMPLETED BY EAGLE ELECTRIC 
FOR A TOTAL OF $1,428.00 WITH THE FUNDS FOR THIS PROJECT COMING FROM THE 
BUILDING MAINTENANCE FUND. 


Voting Aye: Riopelle, Johnson, Olstad, Grassel, DeMers, Vetter, and Helms. 
Voting Nay: None. 


12. Consider approving the Amended Use Agreement between the City of East Grand Forks and the 
Independent School District 595 for the use of the parks and outdoor facilities. 


A MOTION WAS MADE BY COUNCIL MEMBER JOHNSON, SECONDED BY COUNCIL 
MEMBER RIOPELLE, TO APPROVE THE AMENDED USE AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE 
CITY OF EAST GRAND FORKS AND THE INDEPENDENT SCHOOL DISTRICT 595 FOR 
THE USE OF THE PARKS AND OUTDOOR FACILITIES. 


Voting Aye: Riopelle, Johnson, Olstad, Grassel, DeMers, Vetter, and Helms. 

Voting Nay: None. 

13. Consider adopting Resolution No. 20-08-53 approving the hiring of Benjamin Staska as a Firefighter 
at a salary of $45,819.66 per year contingent upon the condition that he successfully complete the 
final steps of the hiring process which includes the psychological evaluation, medical evaluation and 
successfully passing the physical agility test. 

A MOTION WAS MADE BY COUNCIL MEMBER GRASSEL, SECONDED BY COUNCIL 
MEMBER JOHNSON, TO ADOPT RESOLUTION NO. 20-08-53 APPROVING BENJAMIN 
STASKA AS A FIREFIGHTER AT A SALARY OF $45,819.66 PER YEAR. 

Voting Aye: Riopelle, Johnson, Olstad, Grassel, DeMers, Vetter, and Helms. 

Voting Nay: None. 

CLAIMS: 

14. Consider authorizing the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer to issue payment of recommended 
bills and payroll. 

A MOTION WAS MADE BY COUNCIL MEMBER HELMS, SECONDED BY COUNCIL 
MEMBER RIOPELLE, TO AUTHORIZE THE CITY ADMINISTRATOR/CLERK- 
TREASURER TO ISSUE PAYMENT OF RECOMMENDED BILLS AND PAYROLL. 

Voting Aye: Riopelle, Johnson, Olstad, Grassel, DeMers, Vetter, and Helms. 

Voting Nay: None. 

COUNCIL/STAFF REPORTS: 

Mayor Gander said during the last week he along with Mr. Gorte had met with some people regarding 
retail in the community and there were some promising signs in that area. He informed the Council he 

4 I P a g e 


13 



City Council Meeting 


August 18, 2020 


had met with Sheriff Tadman, they had a good visit, and he was thankful for all of the coordination 
between the City and the County when it came to emergency management, law enforcement, and now 
with the health department. He said he is proud of all departments that coordinate with the County and 
how they are getting ready to start up the court system again. He added he had kayaked the Red Lake 
River and how the City will soon be getting a kayak launch. 

Mr. Huttunen informed the Council there was a site visit with representatives from the Greater Minnesota 
Bikes and Trails Commission because of the grant application that had been submitted in July. He stated 
Council member DeMers was able to join them at this meeting along with a couple community members, 
he thought the meeting was positive, they were able to hear from the City directly regarding what was had 
been planned, and currently it is unknown how much will be available for this grant process. He said the 
DNR will provide a priority list to the State and see how far they can get with funding. He added East 
Grand Forks was named as a top four finalist for the Kraft Hockeyville USA which is a national campaign 
mainly done through social media, the grand prize is $150,000, and they will start promoting and asking 
people to vote August 29 th and 30th for East Grand Forks for Civic Center upgrades. He added how this 
typically includes an NHL exhibition game, it is unclear if this will happen, and at the very least the City 
has already won $10,000 for being named a finalist and the city could be listed on national tv with the 
NHL playoffs going on. He asked them to have everyone they know to vote for East Grand Forks. 

ADJOURN: 

A MOTION WAS MADE BY COUNCIL MEMBER JOHNSON, SECONDED BY COUNCIL 
MEMBER HELMS, TO ADJOURN THE AUGUST 18, 2020 COUNCIL MEETING OF THE 
EAST GRAND FORKS, MINNESOTA CITY COUNCIL AT 5:15 P.M. 

Voting Aye: Riopelle, Johnson, Olstad, Grassel, DeMers, Vetter, and Helms. 

Voting Nay: None. 


David Murphy, City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer 


5 I P a g e 


14 



AGENDA ITEM # 3 


Request for Council Action 


Date: September 1 st , 2020 

To: East Grand Forks City Council Mayor Steve Gander, Council members Clarence Vetter, Dale 

Helms, Tim Riopelle, Tim Johnson, Mark Olstad, Chad Grassel, and Marc DeMers. 

Cc: File 

From: David Murphy, East Grand Forks City Ad mini strator 

RE: Approval of Contract with AE2S for H2S Corrosion and Rehabilitation on Manholes T246 and T 

247. 


Background. 

AE2S has provided a proposal for repairing and rehabilitating the corrosion problems on Manholes T246 
and 1-247. The contract includes an estimated repair of approximately $44,000 at an engineering cost of 
$7,260. This item was discussed at the August 25 th Council Work Session. 

Action. 

Approval of Contract with AE2S for H2S Corrosion and Rehabilitation on Manholes 1-246 and 1-247. 


- 1 - 
15 



SHORT FORM OF AGREEMENT 
BETWEEN OWNER AND ENGINEER 
FOR 

PROFESSIONAL SERVICES 

THIS IS AN AGREEMENT effective as of August 7, 2020 (“Effective Date”) between City of East Grand 
Forks ("Owner") and Advanced Engineering and Environmental Services, Inc. (“Engineer”). Owner's Project, of 
which Engineer's services under this Agreement are a part, is generally identified as follows: Manholes 1-246 and 1- 
247: H2S Corrosion and Remediation Construction Assistance (“Project"). Engineer’s services under this Agreement 
are generally identified as follows: 

• Assist Owner with identifying, selecting, and coordinating manhole rehabilitation Contractor. 

o Engineer III, 8 hours: $1,320.00 

• Assist Owner with identifying, selecting, and coordinating bypass pumping Contractor. 

o Engineer III, 8 hours: $1,320.00 

• Assist Owner with specification and bid document preparation. 

o Engineer III, 16 hours: $2,640.00 

• Provide onsite assistance as requested by Owner to monitor and report on Contractor(s) progress and 
acceptability of the work. 

o Engineer III, 12 hours: $1,980.00 

Owner and Engineer further agree as follows: 

1.01 Basic Agreement and Period of Service 

A. Engineer shall provide, or cause to be provided, the services set forth in this Agreement. If authorized by 
Owner, or if required because of changes in the Project, Engineer shall furnish services in addition to those 
set forth above. Owner shall pay Engineer for its services as set forth in Paragraphs 7.01 and 7.02. 

B. Engineer shall complete its services within a reasonable time, or within the following specific time period: 
October 30, 2020. 

C. If the Project includes construction-related professional services, then Engineer's time for completion of 
services is conditioned on the time for Owner and its contractors to complete construction not exceeding one 
(1) months. If the actual time to complete construction exceeds the number of months indicated, then 
Engineer's period of service and its total compensation shall be appropriately adjusted. 

2.01 Payment Procedures 

A. Invoices'. Engineer shall prepare invoices in accordance with its standard invoicing practices and submit the 
invoices to Owner on a monthly basis. Invoices are due and payable within 30 days of receipt. If Owner 
fails to make any payment due Engineer for services and expenses within 30 days after receipt of Engineer’s 
invoice, then the amounts due Engineer will be increased at the rate of .66% per month (or the maximum 
rate of interest permitted by law, if less) from said thirtieth day. In addition, Engineer may, after giving seven 


E-520 Short Form of Agreement Between Owner and Engineer for Professional Services 

Page 1 


01/2019 


16 





days written notice to Owner, suspend services under this Agreement until Engineer has been paid in full all 
amounts due for services, expenses, and other related charges. Owner waives any and all claims against 
Engineer for any such suspension. Payments will be credited first to interest and then to principal. All 
payments under this Agreement shall be in United States Dollars. 

B. Obligation to Pay: Owner’s obligation to pay for Engineer’s services under this Agreement is not contingent 
on Owner’s ability to obtain financing, third-party payments, governmental or regulatory agency approval, 
permits, final adjudication of lawsuit in which Engineer is not involved. Owner’s successful completion of a 
project, or any other event. No retainage will be withheld. 

3.01 Termination 

A. The obligation to continue performance under this Agreement may be tenninated: 

1. For cause, 

a. By either party upon 30 days written notice in the event of substantial failure by the other party 
to perform in accordance with the Agreement’s terms through no fault of the terminating party. 
Failure to pay Engineer for its services is a substantial failure to perforin and a basis for 
termination. 

b. By Engineer: 

1) upon seven days written notice if Owner demands that Engineer furnish or perform services 
contrary to Engineer’s responsibilities as a licensed professional; or 

2) upon seven days written notice if the Engineer’s services for the Project are delayed for more 
than 90 days for reasons beyond Engineer’s control. 

Engineer shall have no liability to Owner on account of a tennination by Engineer under 
Paragraph 3.01.A.l.b. 

c. Notwithstanding the foregoing, this Agreement will not terminate as a result of a substantial 
failure under Paragraph 3.01 .A. 1 .a if the party receiving such notice begins, within seven days of 
receipt of such notice, to correct its substantial failure to perform and proceeds diligently to cure 
such failure within no more than 30 days of receipt of notice; provided, however, that if and to 
the extent such substantial failure cannot be reasonably cured within such 30 day period, and if 
such party has diligently attempted to cure the same and thereafter continues diligently to cure 
the same, then the cure period provided for herein shall extend up to, but in no case more than, 
60 days after the date of receipt of the notice. 

2. For convenience, by Owner effective upon Engineer's receipt of written notice from Owner. 

B. The terminating party under Paragraph 3.01 .A may set the effective date of termination at a time up to 30 days 
later than otherwise provided to allow Engineer to complete tasks whose value would otherwise be lost, to 
prepare notes as to the status of completed and uncompleted tasks, and to assemble Project materials in orderly 
files. 

C. In the event of any termination under Paragraph 3.01, Engineer will be entitled to invoice Owner and to receive 
full payment for all services performed or furnished in accordance with this Agreement and all reimbursable 
expenses incurred through the effective date of termination. 


E-520 Short Form of Agreement Between Owner and Engineer for Professional Services 
_Page 2_ 


01/2019 


17 



4.01 Successors, Assigns, and Beneficiaries 

A. Owner and Engineer are hereby bound and the successors, executors, administrators, and legal representatives 
of Owner and Engineer (and to the extent permitted by Paragraph 4.01 .B the assigns of Owner and Engineer) 
are hereby bound to the other party to this Agreement and to the successors, executors, administrators, and 
legal representatives (and said assigns) of such other party, in respect of all covenants, agreements, and 
obligations of this Agreement. 

B. Neither Owner nor Engineer may assign, sublet, or transfer any rights under or interest (including, but without 
limitation, moneys that are due or may become due) in this Agreement without the written consent of the 
other, except to the extent that any assignment, subletting, or transfer is mandated or restricted by law. Unless 
specifically stated to the contrary in any written consent to an assignment, no assignment will release or 
discharge the assignor from any duty or responsibility under this Agreement. 

C. Unless expressly provided otherwise, nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to create, impose, or give 
rise to any duty owed by Owner or Engineer to any contractor, subcontractor, supplier, other individual or 
entity, or to any surety for or employee of any of them. All duties and responsibilities undertaken pursuant to 
this Agreement will be for the sole and exclusive benefit of Owner and Engineer and not for the benefit of 
any other party. 

5.01 General Considerations 

A. The standard of care for all professional engineering and related services performed or furnished by Engineer 
under this Agreement will be the care and skill ordinarily used by members of the subject profession practicing 
under similar circumstances at the same time and in the same locality. Engineer makes no warranties, express 
or implied, under this Agreement or otherwise, in connection with Engineer’s services. Subject to the 
foregoing standard of care, Engineer and its consultants may use or rely upon design elements and information 
ordinarily or customarily furnished by others, including, but not limited to, specialty contractors, 
manufacturers, suppliers, and the publishers of technical standards. 

B. Engineer shall not at any time supervise, direct, control, or have authority over any contractor's work, nor shall 
Engineer have authority over or be responsible for the means, methods, techniques, sequences, or procedures 
of construction selected or used by any contractor, or the safety precautions and programs incident thereto, 
for security or safety at the Project site, nor for any failure of a contractor to comply with laws and regulations 
applicable to such contractor's furnishing and performing of its work. 

C. Engineer neither guarantees the performance of any contractor nor assumes responsibility for any contractor’s 
failure to furnish and perform its work in accordance with the contract between Owner and such contractor. 
Engineer is not responsible for variations between actual construction bids or costs and Engineer's opinions 
or estimates regarding construction costs. 

D. Engineer shall not be responsible for the acts or omissions of any contractor, subcontractor, or supplier, or of 
any of their agents or employees or of any other persons (except Engineer’s own employees) at the Project 
site or otherwise furnishing or performing any construction work; or for any decision made regarding the 
construction contract requirements, or any application, interpretation, or clarification of the construction 
contract other than those made by Engineer. 

E. The general conditions for any construction contract documents prepared hereunder are to be the “Standard 
General Conditions of the Construction Contract" as prepared by the Engineers Joint Contract Documents 
Committee (EJCDC C-700, 2013 Edition) unless the parties agree otherwise. 


E-520 Short Form of Agreement Between Owner and Engineer for Professional Services 

Page 3 


01/2019 


18 



F. All documents prepared or furnished by Engineer are instruments of service, and Engineer retains an 
ownership and property interest (including the copyright and the right of reuse) in such documents, whether 
or not the Project is completed. Owner shall have a limited license to use the documents on the Project, 
extensions of the Project, and for related uses of the Owner, subject to receipt by Engineer of full payment for 
all services relating to preparation of the documents and subject to the following limitations: (1) Owner 
acknowledges that such documents are not intended or represented to be suitable for use on the Project unless 
completed by Engineer, or for use or reuse by Owner or others on extensions of the Project, on any other 
project, or for any other use or purpose, without written verification or adaptation by Engineer; (2) any such 
use or reuse, or any modification of the documents, without written verification, completion, or adaptation by 
Engineer, as appropriate for the specific purpose intended, will be at Owner’s sole risk and without liability 
or legal exposure to Engineer or to its officers, directors, members, partners, agents, employees, and 
consultants; (3) Owner shall indemnify and hold harmless Engineer and its officers, directors, members, 
partners, agents, employees, and consultants from all claims, damages, losses, and expenses, including 
attorneys’ fees, arising out of or resulting from any use, reuse, or modification of the documents without 
written verification, completion, or adaptation by Engineer; and (4) such limited license to Owner shall not 
create any rights in third parties. 

G. To the fullest extent permitted by law, Owner and Engineer (1) waive against each other, and the other’s 
employees, officers, directors, agents, insurers, partners, and consultants, any and all claims for or entitlement 
to special, incidental, indirect, or consequential damages arising out of, resulting from, or in any way related 
to the Project, and (2) agree that Engineer’s total liability to Owner under this Agreement shall be limited to 
$50,000 or the total amount of compensation received by Engineer, whichever is greater. 

H. The parties acknowledge that Engineer’s scope of services does not include any services related to a 
Hazardous Environmental Condition (the presence of asbestos, PCBs, petroleum, hazardous substances or 
waste as defined by the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act, 42 U.S.C. 
§§9601 et seq., or radioactive materials). If Engineer or any other party encounters a Hazardous 
Environmental Condition, Engineer may, at its option and without liability for consequential or any other 
damages, suspend performance of services on the portion of the Project affected thereby until Owner: (1) 
retains appropriate specialist consultants or contractors to identify and, as appropriate, abate, remediate, or 
remove the Hazardous Environmental Condition; and (2) warrants that the Site is in full compliance with 
applicable Laws and Regulations. 

I. Owner and Engineer agree to negotiate each dispute between them in good faith during the 30 days after 
notice of dispute, after which, if such negotiations are unsuccessful, the parties may exercise their rights at 
law. 

J. This Agreement is to be governed by the law of the State of Minnesota, without regard to its conflicts of laws 
principles. 

6.01 Total Agreement 

A. This Agreement (including any expressly incorporated attachments), constitutes the entire agreement between 
Owner and Engineer and supersedes all prior written or oral understandings. This Agreement may only be 
amended, supplemented, modified, or canceled by a duly executed written instrument. 


E-520 Short Form of Agreement Between Owner and Engineer for Professional Services 
_Page 4_ 


01/2019 


19 


7.01 Basis of Payment—Hourly Rates Plus Reimbursable Expenses 

A. Using the procedures set forth in Paragraph 2.01, Owner shall pay Engineer as follows: 

1. An amount equal to the cumulative hours charged to the Project by each class of Engineer’s 
employees times standard hourly rates for each applicable billing class for all services performed on 
the Project, plus reimbursable expenses and Engineer’s consultants’ charges, if any. 

2. Engineer’s Standard Hourly Rates are attached as Appendix 1. 

3. The total compensation for services and reimbursable expenses is estimated to be $7,260.00. 

7.02 Additional Services: For additional services of Engineer’s employees engaged directly on the Project, Owner 
shall pay Engineer an amount equal to the cumulative hours charged to the Project by each class of Engineer’s 
employees times standard hourly rates for each applicable billing class; plus reimbursable expenses and 
Engineer’s consultants’ charges, if any. Engineer's standard hourly rates are attached as Appendix 1. 

Attachments: 

• Appendix 1, Engineer’s Reimbursable Expense Rates & Standard Hourly Rates Schedules 

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have executed this Agreement, the Effective Date of which is 
indicated on page 1. 

OWNER: ENGINEER: 


City of East Grand Forks 

By: _ 

Name:_ 

Title: _ 

Date Signed: _ 

Address for giving notices: 


Advanced Engineering and Environmental Services, Inc. 

By: _ 

Name: Jordan Grasser _ 

Title: Operations Manager _ 


Date Signed: 08-06-2020 


Address for giving notices: 

Advanced Engineering and Environmental Services, Inc. 

4050 Garden View Drive, Suite 200 
Grand Forks, North Dakota, 58201 


Attn: Legal Department 


E-520 Short Form of Agreement Between Owner and Engineer for Professional Services 

Page 5 


01/2019 


20 




















This is Appendix 1, Engineer’s Reimbursable Expense 
Rates & Standard Hourly Rates Schedules, referred to in and 
part of the Short Form of Agreement between Owner and 
Engineer for Professional Services dated August 7, 2020. 


Engineer’s Reimbursable Expense Rates & Standard Hourly Rates Schedules __ 

Reimbursable Expenses and Standard Hourly Rates in effect on the date of the Agreement are set forth below. Rates are subject to annual adjustment 
effective January 1. 

Labor Rates* 


Administrative I 

$60.00 

Administrative II 

$73.00 

Administrative III 

$88.00 

Communications Specialist I 

$92.00 

Communications Specialist II 

$107.00 

Communications Specialist III 

$123.00 

Communications Specialist IV 

$148.00 

Communications Specialist V 

$163.00 

Construction Services I 

$141.00 

Construction Services II 

$153.00 

Construction Services III 

$173.00 

Construction Services IV 

$190.00 

Construction Services V 

$209.00 

Engineering Assistant 1 

$72.00 

Engineering Assistant 2 

$92.00 

Engineer I 

$115.00 

Engineer II 

$139.00 

Engineer III 

$165.00 

Engineer IV 

$187.00 

Engineer V 

$199.00 

Engineer VI 

$221.00 

Engineer VII 

$236.00 

Engineer VIII 

$246.00 

Engineering Technician I 

$71.00 

Engineering Technician II 

$90.00 

Engineering Technician III 

$107.00 

Engineering Technician IV 

$125.00 

Engineering Technician V 

$141.00 

Engineering Technician VI 

$156.00 

Engineering Technician VII 

$173.00 

Financial Analyst 1 

$95.00 

Financial Analyst II 

$110.00 

Financial Analyst III 

$129.00 

Financial Analyst IV 

$145.00 

Financial Analyst V 

$163.00 

Financial Analyst VI 

$183.00 

Financial Analyst VII 

$199.00 

Financial Analyst VIII 

$218.00 

GIS Specialist I 

$92.00 

GIS Specialist II 

$111.00 

GIS Specialist III 

$131.00 

GIS Specialist IV 

$147.00 

GIS Specialist V 

$161.00 

GIS Specialist VI 

$182.00 


I&C Assistant 

$86.00 

I&C Technician I 

$105.00 

I&C Technician II 

$118.00 

I&C Technician III 

$133.00 

l&C Technician IV 

$144.00 

I&C Technician V 

$157.00 

I&C Specialist 

$171.00 

I&C Senior Specialist 

$181.00 

I&C Manager 

$190.00 

IT I 

$110.00 

IT 11 

$150.00 

IT III 

$180.00 

Land Surveyor Assistant 

$85.00 

Land Surveyor I 

$102.00 

Land Surveyor II 

$122.00 

Land Surveyor III 

$137.00 

Land Surveyor IV 

$151.00 

Operations Specialist I 

$86.00 

Operations Specialist 11 

$104.00 

Operations Specialist III 

$131.00 

Operations Specialist IV 

$148.00 

Operations Specialist V 

$172.00 

Program Coordinator I 

$185.00 

Program Coordinator II 

$199.00 

Program Coordinator III 

$210.00 

Project Coordinator I 

$103.00 

Project Coordinator II 

$114.00 

Project Coordinator III 

$125.00 

Project Coordinator IV 

$140.00 

Project Coordinator V 

$158.00 

Project Manager I 

$175.00 

Project Manager II 

$192.00 

Project Manager III 

$212.00 

Project Manager IV 

$226.00 

Technical Expert I 

$260.00 

Technical Expert II 

$283.00 

Technical Expert III 

Negotiable 


Appendix 1, Engineer’s Reimbursable Expense Rates & Standard Hourly Rates Schedules 
Short Form of Agreement Between Owner and Engineer for Professional Services 

_Page 1_ 


21 


Reimbursable Expense Rates 


Transportation 

$0.65/mile 

Survey Vehicle 

$0.85/mile 

Laser Printouts/Photocopies 

$0.30/copy 

Plotter Printouts 

$ 1.00/s.f. 

UAS - Photo/Video Grade 

$100.00/day 

Video Production Equipment 

$ 100.00/each 

Total Station - Robotic 

$35.00/hour 

Mapping GPS 

$25.00/hour 

Fast Static/RTK GPS 

$50.00/hour 

All-Ten-ain Vehicle/Boat 

$100.00/day 

Air Transportation - Cirrus 

$700.00/hour 

Survey Monument 

$5.00/each 

Fence Posts 

$8.00/each 

Survey Lath 

$3 5.00/bundle 

Survey Stakes/Hubs 

$23.00/bundle 

Cellular Modem 

$75.00/month 

Web Hosting 

$26.00/month 

Legal Services Reimbursement 

$233.00/hour 

Outside Services** 

cost *1.15 

Geotechnical Services 

cost * 1.30 

Out of Pocket Expenses*** 

cost* 1.15 

Rental Car 

cost* 1.20 

Project Specific Equipment 

Negotiable 


* Position titles are for labor rate grade purposes only. *** Includes toll telephone, shipping, postage, 

subsistence, technical literature, equipment rental, etc. 

** Includes laboratory testing, architectural and 
engineering consultants, surveying, etc. 

Rates are subject to annual adjustment effective January 1. 


Appendix 1, Engineer’s Reimbursable Expense Rates & Standard Hourly Rates Schedules 
Short Form of Agreement Between Owner and Engineer for Professional Services 

Page 2 


22 



23 



#4 

Minnesota Municipal Utilities Association 
AMENDMENT TO SERVICES AGREEMENT 

Safety Management Program 


Contract Date: J uly 31, 2020 Contract Number: 28-2021 


I h ,L S , e A ViCe ! a 9 reement entered into between Minnesota Municipal Utilities Association 
(MMUA) and City of East Grand Forks (East Grand Forks), dated July 29, 2019, contract 
number 28-2020, is amended as follows: 


PART II, Section 1. 


1. DURATION: This Agreement shall remain in force from October 1, 2020 until 
September 30, 2021 (the "expiration date"). 


PART III, Section 1. 

1. COMPENSATION: For the services covered by this Agreement, East Grand 
Forks shall pay MMUA an annual fee of thirty-four thousand five hundred dollars 
and 00 cents ($34,500.00) for the 2020-21 annual period. Such compensation 
shall be due and payable according to the selected payment terms below 


Payment terms for the fee agreed to above shall be based on one of the following 
options (select one): 


□ Annual Payment ($34,500.00) 

□ Quarterly Payments ($8,625.00 each) 

For any term of less than twelve full calendar months, the fee shall be a portion 
of the annual fee, pro-rated based on the number of calendar months or partial 
calendar months in which the services were provided as a percentage of twelve 


The parties hereby accept the terms of the Agreement as modified. 


City of East Grand Forks 


Minnesota 


Utilities Association 


By 


Title 


Title / 

/ 

Executive Director 

Date 


Date 

Julv 31. 2020 


Purchase Order # 


24 



#5 


Minutes of the regular meeting of the Water, Light, Power and Building Commission of the City of East 
Grand Forks, Minnesota on August 5, 2020 at 8:00 a.m held remotely due to the COVID 19 virus 
pandemic and pursuant to MN Statutes 13D.02, 13D.021 and 13D.04. 

Present: Quirk, Grinde, Beauchamp, DeMers 
Absent: None 

Also present: Keith Mykleseth, Ron Galstad, Brian Johnson, Jeff Olson, Steve Emery, Todd Forster, 
Brianna Feil, Kevin Hatcher, Corey Thompson, Karla Anderson. 

It was moved by Commissioner Grinde seconded by Commissioner Beauchamp that the minutes of the 
previous regular meeting of July 15, 2020 be approved as read. 

Voting Aye: Quirk, Grinde, Beauchamp, DeMers 
Voting Nay: None 

It was moved by Commissioner Grinde seconded by Commissioner Beauchamp to authorize the 
Secretary to issue payment of the recommended bills and payroll in the amount of $761,757.96. 

Voting Aye: Quirk, Grinde, Beauchamp, DeMers 
Voting Nay: None 

It was moved by Commissioner Grinde seconded by Commissioner Beauchamp to accept the letter of 
resignation from Alan Neer, Water Plant Operator, effective 8-14-20. 

Voting Aye: Quirk, Grinde, Beauchamp, DeMers 
Voting Nay: None 

It was moved by Commissioner Grinde seconded by Commissioner Beauchamp to approve requesting 
the Civil Service to begin the hiring process for a Water Plant Operator. 

Voting Aye: Quirk, Grinde, Beauchamp, DeMers 
Voting Nay: None 

It was moved by Commissioner Grinde seconded by Commissioner Beauchamp to adjourn at 8:45 a.m. to 
a special closed meeting on August 12, 2020 at 8:00 am to be held at City Hall in the City Council 
Chambers at 600 DeMers Ave, East Grand Forks MN. 

Voting Aye: Quirk, Grinde, Beauchamp, DeMers 
Voting Nay: None 


Lori Maloney 
Secretary 


25 



Minutes of a closed meeting of the Water, Light, Power and Building Commission of the City of 
East Grand Forks, Minnesota held at 8:00 a.m. on August 12, 2020 in the City Council 
Chambers. 

Present: Quirk, Grinde, Beauchamp 
Absent: DeMers 

Also present: Ron Galstad, Keith Mykleseth, and Jeff Olson 

This meeting is closed pursuant to MN Statute 13D.04, Subdivision 2, which allows the 
Commission to meet in closed session. 

Pursuant to Minnesota Statutes, Section 13D.05, subdivision 3(a) the Commission will conduct 
a Special Closed Personnel Meeting to evaluate the performance of a certain Water and Light 
employee. A hearing was held to present the matter and discussion was held. 

It was moved by Commissioner Beauchamp seconded by Commissioner Grinde at 8:26 a.m. to 
close the record on the hearing and to have additional discussion in the closed session. 

Aye: Quirk, Grinde, Beauchamp 
Nay: None 

Further discussion was held. 

A motion was made by Commissioner Grinde and seconded by Commissioner Beauchamp 
regarding the employment of Michael Coauette. There was a unanimous decision. The 
conclusion will be summarized at the next open meeting of the Commission. 

Aye: Quirk, Grinde, Beauchamp 
Nay: None 

It was moved by Commissioner Grinde seconded by Commissioner Beauchamp to adjourn at 
8:45 a.m. to the next regular meeting to be held virtual on 8-19-20 at 8:00 a.m. 


Lori Maloney 
Commission Secretary 


26 



AGENDA ITEM # 6 


Request for Council Action 


Date: 8/19/2020 

To: East Grand Forks City Council Mayor Steve Gander, Council President Mark Olstad, Council 

Vice-President Chad Grassel, Council members Clarence Vetter, Dale Helms, Tim Riopelle, Tim 
Johnson, and Marc DeMers. 

Cc: File 

From: Jason Stordahl-Public Works Director 
RE: French Drain 


Background: The ditch along the levee (dry side) west of Faurel Dr. SE, and between the Cities’ 
Stormwater Fift Station south to the up-and-over needs improvement. After an average rainfall water 
stands in that area for many days, and the area is now overgrown with cattails. It is not only an eyesore, 
but makes maintenance very difficult. And we continually have issues with the catch basin plugging 
with cattails and other misc. debris. 

We obtained a permit from the US Army CORPS of Engineers to improve the ditch. If Council approves 
the project we would install drain tile under the ditch, and regrade the ditch bottom. 

I received quotations from RJ Zavoral and Sons and Molstad Excavating. Please see pricing below, and 
quotations included in your packet. The City has sufficient funds to cover the expense. 

RJ Zavoral and Sons $41,415.70 

Molstad Excavating $71,140.00 


Recommendation: Award RJ Zavoral and Sons the French Drain Ditching project for $41,415.70. 


- 1 - 
27 



RJ 


ZAVORAL 


8 . SONS, INC 

“Moving the Earth Since 1951” 


BID PROPOSAL 


PO Box 435 
East Grand Forks, MN 56721-0435 
Main 218.773.0586 Fax 218.773.6423 
www. rjzavoral .com 


QUOTE Widseth 

TO 1600 Central Avenue NE 

East Grand Forks, MN 56721 


JOB Drain Tile Installation / Ditch Regrading 

LOCATION Pont of Woods 5 ,h Addition 
DATE 06/25/2020 


ITEM 



DESCRIPTION [ 

QUAN 

UNIT 

UNIT PRICE ! 

EXT PRICE 

1 

MOBILIZATION 

1.000 

LS 

$3,000 00 

$3,000 00 

2 

KNOCK HOLE INTO CATCH BASIN STRUCTURE 

1.000 

LS 

$1,500 00 

$1,500.00 

3 

6" DRAIN TILE W/ FILTER SOCK 

1,024 000 

LF 

$ 18 00 

$18,432.00 

4 

DITCH REGRADING 

1,024 000 

LF 

$ 5.25 

$5,376.00 

5 

TOPSOIL BORROW (CV) 

125.000 

CY 

$ 30.00 

$3,750.00 

6 

TURF ESTABLISHMENT (BFM) *** 

3,982.000 

SY 

$ 2.35 

$9,357 70 





TOTAL: 

$41,415.70 


SURVEYING NOT INCLUDED 

TESTING NOT INCLUDED 

EROSION CONTROL NOT INCLUDED 

PERMITS NOT INCLUDED 

BOND NOT INCLUDED, IF NECCESSARY ADD 1% 

SAWCUTTING FOR REMOVALS NOT INCLUDED 

ONE MOBILIZATION INCLUDED 

ALL ITEMS TIED 

***SEEDING QUANTITY INCREASED TO 35 FEET WIDTH TO ACCOUNT FOR EQUIPMENT ACCESS 

Signed: ^ 

Title:__ 

Date 




28 


Page 1 of 1 








Drain Tile Installation / Ditch Regrading 
Point of Woods 5th Addition 
East Grand Forks, Mn 


WIDSETH 

SMITH 

NOLTING 


6/16/2020 


DESCRIPTION 

UNIT 

QUANTITY 

UNIT PRICE 


Mobilization 

LS 

1 

l Toe ~ 


Knock Hole into Catch Basin structure 

LS 

1 

*"1 Do, LV 


4” Drain Tile w/ filter sock 

LF 

1024 

H'D. 00 

MHiiXsMMM 

Ditch Regrading 

LF 

1024 

O 

r\ 

if 

mmmam 

Topsoil Borrow (CV) 

CY 

125 

2,2-OG 


Turf Establishment (BFM) 

SY 

3982 

t?. qO 

■ 







~7j, HP. tO 


ESTIMATED CONSTRUCTION TOTAL = 



#7 


RESOLUTION NO. 20-09-54 

Council Member __, supported by Council Member_, introduced the following 

resolution and moved its adoption: 

WHEREAS, the City of East Grand Forks has spent funds on supplies to help prevent the spread 
of COVID-19 in the polling places; and 

WHEREAS, the City is eligible for $4,407.91 in funding from the County through the CARES 
Act for these expenses; and 

WHEREAS, to access these funds the City has to approve the agreement between the City and the 
County; and 

NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED the City Council of East Grand Forks hereby approves 
the 2020 CARES Act County-Municipality Agreement that will be executed by the Mayor and 
City Administrator. 

Voting Aye: 

Voting Nay: 

Absent: 


The President declared the resolution passed. 
Attest: 


Passed: September 1, 2020 


City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer President of Council 

I hereby approve the foregoing resolution this 1 st day of September, 2020. 


Mayor 


30 



STATE OF MINNESOTA 

2020 CARES ACT GRANT COUNTY - MUNICIPALITY AGREEMENT 


This Agreement (hereinafter “Agreement”) is made between Polk County, ("Grantee"), and the city of 
East Grand Forks, (“Municipality”) 


Recitals 


1 Under Minnesota Laws 2020, Chapter 77, section 4, Grantee applied for and received funds as 
requested in the grant application. Grantee entered into a Grant Agreement, which is attached as 
Exhibit A and incorporated into this Agreement as described in paragraph 1.3 below. 

2 Grantee represented that it is duly qualified and agreed to perform all services described in that 
Agreement to the satisfaction of the State and in accordance with all federal and state laws 
authorizing these expenditures. Pursuant to Minn.Stat.§ 16B.98, Subd. 1, Grantee and Municipality 
agree to minimize administrative costs as a condition of this grant. 

3 Federal funds for this agreement are provided pursuant to the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic 
Security Act, Public Law 116-136, hereinafter the CARES Act. 

4. Grantee is responsible for elections within its county and Municipality/Township operates polling 
places within its jurisdiction. Both are in need of funds to take the necessary steps to respond to 

coronavirus, domestically or internationally, for the 2020 election cycle.in a complete manner. 

5. Municipality/Township represents that it has insufficient resources to respond in a complete manner 
without the grant amount provided pursuant to this agreement. 


1 


Agreement 

Effectiveness of Agreement 

1.1 Effective date : September 1, 2020, or the date all required signatures, have been affixed to the 
agreement by Grantee and Municipality, whichever is later. No payments will be made to Grantee 
until this Agreement is fully approved and executed. 

1.2 Expiration date : December 31, 2020, or when all funds applied for and provided to Municipality 

by Grantee have been expended, or returned to Grantee for transmission to the State pursuant to 
paragraph 4.4 of the Agreement between Grantee and State, whichever occurs first. 

1.3 Application of Terms. Municipality agr ees to be subject to the obligations applicable to Grantee 

in the Grant Agreement set forth in Exhibit A in the following paragraphs of that Agreement: 
paragraphs 1 through 5; 7 through 11; and 13 through 16. 


2 Municipality’s Duties 

Municipality is hereby awarded $4,407.91 from the funds provided by State to Grantee in 
the Grant Agreement set forth in Exhibit A, and will expend, no later than November 10, 2020, the 
funds only for the federal and state purposes, in preparations for and the necessary events connected 
with the primary election to be held August 11, 2020 and the general election to be held November 3, 
2020, at which federal offices are on the ballot, and will return all unspent grant funds to Grantee, as 
described in the Grant Application submitted by Grantee, which is attached as Exhibit B and 
incorporated into this Agreement, by December 15, 2020. Grantee shall submit, by November 10, 
2020, a financial reporting form to the Grantee in the form Grantee must use to report grant 
expenditures to the State of Minnesota, stating the amount spent from this grant in calendar year 2020 
for authorized expenses or electronic roster systems, a description of each expense or purchase, and 
how much of the grant award is unexpended and is being returned, if any, and the total of the 
proportionate match required by Minnesota Laws 2020, Chapter 77, section 4. 


1 

31 




3. Authorized Representative 

Grantee’s Authorized Representative is Steven Gander, Mayor at 600 Demers Ave NW East Grand 
Forks, MN 56721 (218) 773-2483 mayor@egf.mn 

Municipality’s Authorized Representative is David Murphy, City Administrator at 600 Demers Ave 
NW East Grand Forks, MN 56721 (218)773-2483 dmurphy@egf.mn 

Grant payment will be made to: 

City of East Grand Forks 
Federal ID Number: 41-6005112 

If either Authorized Representative changes at any time before the funds provided for in this 
Agreement are fully expended, parties must notify each other of the change. 


GRANTEE (County) Grantee certifies that the appropriate person(s) have executed the Agreement on behalf of Grantee as required by 
applicable resolutions or ordinances. 

By:_ 

Signed:_ 

Title:_ 

Date:_ 

MUNICIPALITY 

Jurisdiction:_ 

By:_ 

Title:_ 

Date:_ 

By:_ 

Title:_ 

Date:_ 


Distribution: Grantee 

Municipality 


2 

32 



CARES Act Election Funding FAQ 
Last Updated 7/9/2020 


Authorized Uses of the CARES Act Funding 

The use of the CARES Act funds is restricted by both Federal and State law. Federal law requires that 
the funds be used to "to prevent , prepare for, and respond to coronavirus, domestically or 
internationally , for the 2020 Federal election cycle." State law further limits the uses of the funds to 
six broad categories for which the funds can be used, including: 

(1) ensuring the health and safety of election officials and in-person voters, including the 
purchase of sanitation and disinfectant supplies; 

(2) public outreach and preparations for implementing social distancing guidelines related to 
voting, including additional signs and staff; 

(3) facilitation, support, and preparation for increased absentee voting, including voter 
education materials, printing, and postage; 

(4) preparation of training materials and administration of additional training of local election 
officials; 

(5) preparation of new polling place locations; and 

(6) purchasing an electronic roster system meeting the technology requirements of Minnesota 
Statutes, section 201.225, subdivision 2, along with equipment necessary to support the 
system. 

Minnesota law also specifies that a political subdivision is eligible to use the funds for no more than 
75 percent of the total cost of purchasing an electronic roster system and necessary support 
equipment, and no more than 80 percent of the total cost of any other authorized activities. 

Election Specific CARES Act Funds Q & A 
Federal Purpose Requirement: 

Q. Can I use these funds on new expenses that are unrelated to the pandemic but would improve 
the safety of polling places? 

A. No, with CARES Act funds you can only cover costs that you are incurring as a result of the 
pandemic. 

Q. Our jurisdiction is facing a budget shortfall, can I use these funds pay the salary of my staff or 
supplant other costs of my division. 

A. No, with CARES Act funds they must be used to pay for costs being incurred because of 
the pandemic or in response to the pandemic. Examples of allowable costs in this context 
could include cleaning supplies and protective masks for staff and poll workers, resources to 
meet an unanticipated increased demand for absentee ballots in response to COVID-19, and 
temporary staff to process the increased absentee ballot demand. Allowable costs would 
not include those that are currently paid with state or local election jurisdiction funds, such 
as the regularly anticipated demand for mail or absentee ballots. 


1 


33 



CARES Act Election Funding FAQ 
Last Updated 7/9/2020 


Staffing Costs: 

Q. Can I use the CARES Act funds to pay overtime costs for employees or to pay temporary 
employees if those cost are associated with the increase in absentee balloting due to the 
pandemic? 

A. Yes, the overtime costs and temporary staff costs are allowable as long as the staff are 
working on activities related to the pandemic. If staff time is going to be paid through CARES 
Act funds, the jurisdiction should document the time spent on pandemic response. 

Q. Can the CARES Act funds be used to bring back furloughed employees from other areas of my 
jurisdiction if they are brought back to work on increased elections work due to the pandemic? 

A. Yes, if the staff are coming back to work on activities related to the 2020 federal elections 
as a result of the pandemic, the costs would be allowable. For example, if they are needed 
to manage printing unanticipated large numbers of ballots or processing an increase in 
absentee materials due to the pandemic. 

Q. Can I use CARES Act funds to pay all of my election judge's salary? 

A. No, you can only use CARES Act funds to pay costs incurred as a result or in response to 
the pandemic. So you could not pay your regular election judge salary from the CARES Act 
funds. However, you could use CARES Act funds to pay any necessary increase in election 
judge wages in order to attract a sufficient number of election judges. Further, if you have 
to hire additional election judges or staff to assist with pandemic-related items (cleaning, 
traffic flow to ensure social distancing, etc.) that individual's salary could be paid from the 
CARES Act funds. 

Election Judge Training: 

Q. I am using the on-line election judge training put on by Seachange for the first time this year due 
to COVID. Will the setup cost and the cost per election judge be an expense I can use towards this 
grant as I would not have gone this direction and still offered in person training had it not been for 
COVID? 


A. Yes, additional costs states or local governments incur to conduct virtual trainings and 
other activities vital to improving the administration of federal elections, can be claimed 
under the grant. 

Q. I have also setup all of my clerk and head judge training through my webpage due to 
COVID. Could I use a portion of my time that it took me to set that up? 

A. Yes, because the costs are due to COVID. However, any staff time that is paid as COVID 
time must be for tasks in direct response to the pandemic and must be documented. 


2 


34 



CARES Act Election Funding FAQ 
Last Updated 7/9/2020 


Printing Costs: 

Q. My jurisdiction has incurred costs to communicate changes in absentee balloting rules that 
resulted from the pandemic. Can we use CARES Act funds to cover those costs? 

A. Yes, costs to communicate changes in voting processes due to the pandemic are 
allowable costs. 

Q. My jurisdiction is printing and mailing information about how to safely vote from home, is that 
an allowable cost? 

A. Yes, however general "get out the vote" or other materials designed to increase voting 
that are unrelated to the pandemic eligible for CARES Act funds. 

Polling Place Costs: 

Q. We need to move polling places from assisted living facilities to other sites associated with senior 
citizens and may need to lease the new space. Can we use CARES Act funds to cover those costs? 

A. Yes, unanticipated costs to lease polling facilities are allowable costs. 

Q. I need to install some temporary Plexiglas barriers, are those allowable costs? 

A. Yes, additional equipment to improve the health and safety of the polling place in 
response to the pandemic is eligible for CARES Act funds. 

Q. The state is providing a quantity of masks, sanitizer, and disinfectant. I would like to purchase 
additional protective equipment for election judges and voters. Are those expenses eligible for 
CARES Act funds? 

A. Yes, although the state is providing some safety and protective equipment, the 
jurisdiction is free to purchase additional equipment (gloves, face shields, etc) using CARES 
Act funds. 

Equipment Costs: 

Q. We expect to receive a much higher percentage of absentee ballots and need to purchase more 
automated letter opening equipment and scanners. Can we use HAVA funds to purchase more 
equipment? Can we lease the equipment? 

A. Yes, those would be allowable costs, with the caveat that you need to ensure the costs 
are allocated to the grant in appropriate proportions. If you decide to lease the equipment, 
you must also follow requirements in Section 200.465 of 2 CFR which outline circumstances 
you should consider in determining whether to lease or buy the equipment. 


3 


35 



CARES Act Election Funding FAQ 
Last Updated 7/9/2020 


State Required Match: 

Q. Are their stipulations on what funds can be used for the match? 

A. No, there are no stipulations on what funds can be used for the match. 

Q. Can we use our general local government CARES Act funding for the match? 

A. Yes, the general local government CARES Act funding can be used for the match. 

Q. Do I need to have my jurisdiction separately allocate funds for the match, or can I use already 
budgeted funds? 

A. You can use already budgeted funds. The only requirement under the state legislation is 
that only 80% of any cost be paid for by CARES Act funds. So, if you want to hire temporary 
staff to assist with absentee processing due to the increase in absentees in the pandemic, 
you could simply pay 80% of their salary out of CARES Act funds and 20% out of your 
general department funds. 

Local Agreements: 

Q. What is required to be in the written agreement with the municipalities? 

A. The only requirement from the OSS is that there be an agreement and that it be 
memorialized in writing. The requirement that it be in writing is to ensure that there is 
evidence of an agreement in case a jurisdiction disputes the allocation. The written 
agreements do not need to be submitted to the OSS, the county must simply certify that 
there is an agreement. Agreements themselves should be kept, as well as all other 
documentation, for the full audit period. 


4 


36 



AGENDA ITEM # 8 & 9 


Request for Council Action 


Date: 8/27/2020 

To: East Grand Forks City Council Mayor Steve Gander, Council President Mark Olstad, Council 

Vice-President Chad Grassel, Council members Clarence Vetter, Dale Helms, Tim Riopelle, Tim 
Johnson, and Marc DeMers. 

Cc: File 

From: Jason Stordahl-Public Works Director 

RE: bead Equipment Operator and Equipment Operator promotions 


Background: 

On July 21,2020 the City Council approved the East Grand Forks Public Works Department to proceed 
with an internal promotional process to fill a vacancy in the Lead Equipment Operator position as well 
as the Operator position. This process has been finalized, producing a top candidate for each position. 

Recommendations: 

To authorize the East Grand Forks Public Works Department to promote Josh Krostue to the position 
of Lead Equipment Operator, and Travis Rambel to the position of Operator. 

Enclosures: 

See resolutions 


- 1 - 
37 



#8 


RESOLUTION NO. 20-09-55 

Council Member_supported by Council Member __introduced the following 

resolution and moved its adoption: 

WHEREAS, the City of East Grand Forks has an internal opening for position of “Lead Equipment 
Operator”, and 

WHEREAS, applications were reviewed by the Civil Service Commission and qualified 
candidates were interviewed by City Staff; and 

WHEREAS, City Staff has recommended the promotion of Josh Krostue to Lead Equipment 
Operator, and 

WHEREAS, Mr. Hansen would be placed on the current Grade 11 Step 8 which is $27.28 per 
hour; and 

NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF EAST GRAND 
FORKS, MINNESOTA: 

1. Josh Krostue is promoted to Lead Equipment Operator at a salary of $27.28 per hour. 


Voting Aye: 
Voting Nay: 
Absent: 


The President declared the resolution passed. 
Attest: 


Passed: September 1, 2020 


City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer President of Council 

I hereby approve the foregoing resolution this 1 st day of September, 2020. 


Mayor 


38 



#9 


RESOLUTION NO. 20-09-56 

Council Member_supported by Council Member __introduced the following 

resolution and moved its adoption: 

WHEREAS, the City of East Grand Forks has an internal opening for position of “Equipment 
Operator”, and 

WHEREAS, applications were reviewed by the Civil Service Commission and qualified 
candidates were interviewed by City Staff; and 

WHEREAS, City Staff has recommended the promotion of Travis Rambel to Equipment Operator, 
and 

WHEREAS, Mr. Rambel would be placed on the current Grade 10 Step 4 which is $22.34 per 
hour; and 

NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF EAST GRAND 
FORKS, MINNESOTA: 

1. Travis Rambel is promoted to Equipment Operator at a salary of $22.34 per hour. 


Voting Aye: 
Voting Nay: 
Absent: 


The President declared the resolution passed. 
Attest: 


Passed: September 1, 2020 


City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer President of Council 

I hereby approve the foregoing resolution this 1 st day of September, 2020. 


Mayor 


39 



AGENDA ITEM # 10 


Request for Council Action 

Date: 08/24/2020 

To: East Grand Forks City Council Mayor Steve Gander, President Mark Olstad, Council Members: 

Clarence Vetter, Chad Grassel, Marc Demers, Tim Riopelle, Tim Johnson and Dale Helms 

Cc: File 

From: Michael S. Hedlund - Chief of Police 

RE: Police Officer Hiring Request - Request to Start a New Hiring Register 


Background: The East Grand Forks Police Department is requesting permission to start a new hiring 
process for the position of Police Officer. We expect to have a police officer opening sometime this Fall 
and we are in the process of hiring the two officers that we placed on our current roster. 

Recommendations: That the East Grand Forks City Council approve the start of a new hiring 
process/register for the position of Police Officer. 

Enclosures: None 


40 



AGENDA ITEM #11 


Request for Council Action 


Date: August 25,2020 

To: East Grand Forks City Council Mayor Steve Gander, Council President Mark Olstad, Vice' 

President Chad Grassel; Council members Clarence Vetter, Dale Helms, Tim Riopelle, Tim 
Johnson, and Marc DeMers. 

Cc: File 

From: Reid Huttunen, Parks & Recreation 

RE: Request to rent Civic Center for annual Arts & Craft Show 


Background: 

The Arts & Crafts Council is planning to host their annual Arts & Crafts Show on the dates of October 
3 rd and 4 th . 


Due to COVID guidelines, they have chosen to limit this year's show to only the Civic Center and at 
current guidelines will be restricted to a total of 250 people allowed in the building at a time. This 
includes vendors, guests, volunteers and employees. They will also have to follow all indoor mask 
mandates as required by executive order. 

In addition to the indoor vendors, the craft show has been asking vendors if they are willing to have a 
booth set outside in the Civic Center east parking lot. This would allow for additional vendors and 
guests to attend. MN Guidelines allow for 250 people to gather at indoor and outdoor settings, so long 
as social distancing can remain in effect. 

Under a written lease agreement, it will be the responsibility of the Arts & Craft Council to adhere to 
all COVID guidelines and restrictions put in place by the MN Dept of Health. 

Recommendation: 

Recommend a rental rate of $250 a day for the use of the Civic Center. A total of $750 for set up Friday, 
and the show Saturday and Sunday. 

Enclosure: 

Enclosure 


41 




City of East Grand Forks 
Facility Use Agreement 

It is the City of East Grand Forks' hereinafter "CITY" desire that all patrons who periodically use a CITY 
building, facility, park, room, arena, field, recreational area, shelter, or other City property are able to 
enjoy the "Facility". This agreement has been set in place to achieve that goal. 

The person signing this agreement and the organization (herinafter the "User") on whose behalf the 
"Agreement" is being made are responsible for compliance with this agreement. All Users's are required 
to read and sign the City Use Agreement as part of the rental and before the Facility can be rented by the 
User. Please read carefully, fill out City, User, and Event sections, initial at the bottom of each page, and 
sign in the signature page at the end of this document. 

1. CITY FACILITY INFORMATION 

Name of CITY Facility/Property: Civic Center 

Address/Area/Location of Facility/Property): 300 15 th St NE, East Grand Forks, MN 56721 

Room/Area of Use Rented: Entire Facility 

The RENTAL FEE and consideration to be paid by the User shall be as follows: 

Rental Fee sum of $750.00 for the following dates. 

Facility: Civic Center for the dates of October 2 nd , 3 rd , & 4 th , 2020 

Friday, October 2 nd 3:00 p.m. to 9:00 p.m. for set up 
Saturday, October 3 rd ; show hours 10:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. 

Sunday, October 4 th ; show hours 11:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. 

Special Conditions: 

Specific equipment/special conditions as designed by Parks & Recreation Department included in 
the rental agreement are as follows: 

Specific hours of operation can be amended, per the schedule of Arts & Craft Show activities with 

the Parks & Recreation Superintendent 

COVID Preparedness Plan guidelines be provided to the CITY and its Parks & Recreation 

Superintendent by USER prior to any activity in the facility and must be followed by all building 

users and guests. 


2. USER INFORMATION 

Organization Name: 
Address, City, State, Zip: 
Contact name/title: 
Email: 


East Grand Forks Arts & Crafts Council 
PO Box 622, East Grand Forks, MN 56721 
Lorraine O'Shea, Show Director 

egfcraftcouncil@gmail.com 


42 


1 | P a g e 












A. This agreement, made and entered into this_day of_by and between 

the City of East Grand Forks Parks & Recreation Department, a municipal corporation, acting by 
and through its Superintendent of Parks & Recreation and the "User" EGF Arts & Craft Council 
(list organization/renter), now, therefore, in consideration of the promises contained herein, do 
hereby agree as follows: 

B. The CITY agrees to provide the use of the above listed Facility or the following parts therein, 
described above in City Information. 

Renting said premises subject to the conditions, rules, regulations and policies that the CITY shall 
by Ordinance and Resolution establish for CITY property and facilities from time to time, which 
Ordinance and Resolution are mutually understood and agreed by the parties hereto be a part 
hereof. It is further mutually agreed that any attached conditions, rules, regulations and policies 
of the CITY are a part of this Rental agreement. 

C. User shall perform routine pick up after its use of the rented FACILITY, ensuring equipment is 
cleaned and returned to its beginning location; as well as area locker rooms, ensuring locker room 
and shower area floors are clear of any items and all equipment is properly stored. All garbage will 
be placed in the appropriate receptacles as determined by the CITY. If not cleaned to the sole 
satisfaction of the CITY, the User agrees to pay CITY the costs the City incurs for clean-up purposes. 

D. No alcoholic beverages shall be sold or permitted by User upon the premises. Unless authorized 
by City Council. 

E. Indemnification . The User shall defend, indemnify and hold harmless the City and its officials, 
employees and agents from any liabilities, judgments, losses, costs or charges (including 
attorneys' fees) incurred by the City or any of its officials, employees or agents as a result of any 
claim, demand, action or suit relating to any bodily injury or illness (including death), loss or 
property damage caused by, arising out of, related to or associated with the use of the Facility by 
the User or by the User's guests or invitees, except to the extent caused by the sole negligence, 
gross negligence or willful misconduct of the City or its officers, employees or agents. 

F. Waiver and Assumption of Risk . The User knows, understands and acknowledges the risks and 
hazards associated with using the Community Center and hereby assumes any and all risks and 
hazards associated therewith. User hereby irrevocably waives any and all claims against the City 
or any of its officials, employees or agents for any bodily injury (including death), loss or property 
damage incurred by the User as a result of using the Community Center and hereby irrevocably 
releases and discharges the City and any of its officials, employees or agents from any and all 
claims of liability. 

G. Insurance. The User is required to obtain liability insurance for the Agreement. If insurance is 
required. User agrees to obtain at least a minimum $1 Million General Liability coverage. The 
User agree to provide a certificate of insurance to the City showing the required coverage at least 



seven (7) days prior to the Event and naming the City of East Grand Forks as an Additional 
Insured. 

H. User shall be solely responsible for the supervision and control of its volunteers and participants 
and it is strongly recommended by the CITY that if said volunteers are working directly with 
children that background checks be performed in accordance with "The Minnesota Child 
Protection Act (MN Stat. 299C)". Any volunteers provided by the User are not "City Volunteers" 
and are acting on behalf of the User and ARE NOT acting on behalf of the CITY. 

I. CITY, its agents and employees shall have the right to enter the rented premise upon reasonable 
advance notice for the purpose of inspecting, repairing, altering or improving the rented 
premises, or for any other purpose. There shall be no diminution of rent and no liability on the 
part of CITY by reason of any inconvenience, annoyance or injury caused by CITY'S reasonable 
exercise of the rights reserved by CITY in this Article. 

J. DISCRIMINATION. No person shall be discriminated against in the terms and conditions of 
employment, personnel practices, or access to and participation in, programs, services, and 
activities with regard to race, color, creed, religion, national origin, sex, gender, marital status, 
status with regard to public assistance, disability, sexual orientation, age, family care leave 
status, or veteran status. 

K. Governing Law . This Agreement shall be governed by and interpreted in accordance with the 
laws of the State of Minnesota. 

L. User agrees to abide by all rules, regulations, and guidelines set in place by the State of Minnesota, 
County of Polk, and City of East Grand Forks in compliance and operation of event. 

M. User agrees to provide in writing to the Parks & Recreation Superintendent, a COVID Preparedness 
Plan, as required by the State of Minnesota prior to any use of Facility under this agreement, and 
agrees to comply with said COVID Preparedness Plan as written. 

N. User shall not assign this agreement, nor suffer any use of the said leased premises other than as 

herein specified, nor sublet the premises or any part thereof, without the prior consent of the City 
and its Parks & Recreation Superintendent. 

O. User is responsible for any lost keys, and any costs that the City might incur to replace and/or re¬ 
key the Facility. 

P. Priority of Use/Cancellation. The City shall have first priority for all governmental and 
department activities. The priority for all other users shall be on a first come, first served basis. 
The City reserves the right to cancel any Event or Agreement as it deems necessary. If the City 
cancels the event, the User shall be entitled to a full refund of any rent paid. 


3 | P d g e 


44 


Q. Set Up, Clean Up , Misc. Equipment. 

Set up. Clean Up, Misc. Equipment use must be followed under the standards of use and care as 
described in the Special Conditions listed below or as described above by this agreement. 

R. Special conditions of this Agreement not hereinabove provided are as follows: 


IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties have hereunto set their hands the day and year first above 
written. 

IMPORTANT-READ BEFORE SIGNING 

I am an authorized agent of the organization submitting this agreement. The information provided 
in this agreement is true and correct. I have read and understand this agreement and agree to all 
of the aforementioned rules, regulations, and conditions of use. 

Signature _ 

Print name_Title_ 

Organization East Grand Forks Arts & Craft Council _ 

Address PO Box 622, East Grand Forks, MN 56721 

Telephone: Home/Mobile_Work_ 

CITY OF EAST GRAND FORKS 

By:_ 

Its Mayor 


By:_ 

Its City Administrator 


45 


4 | P a g e 





#12 


Accounts Payable 

Check Register Totals Only 

User: apassa 

Printed: 8/28/2020 - 3:11 PM 



City of East Grand Forks 


P. 0. Box 373 

East Grand Forks, MN 56721 
(218) 773-2483 


Check 

Date 

Vendor No 

Vendor Name 

Amount 

Voucher 

34678 

09/01/2020 

ACM001 

Acme Electric Companies 

249.18 

0 

34679 

09/01/2020 

ADV007 

Advanced Auto Parts 

223.26 

0 

34680 

09/01/2020 

ADV001 

Advanced Business Methods Inc 

1,389.39 

0 

34681 

09/01/2020 

AMA001 

Amazon.com 

753.16 

0 

34682 

09/01/2020 

AME005 

AmeriPride Services Inc 

629.34 

0 

34683 

09/01/2020 

ANY001 

Anytime Plumbing 

602.70 

0 

34684 

09/01/2020 

AUT001 

Auto Glass & Aftermarket Inc 

112.00 

0 

34685 

09/01/2020 

BAK001 

Baker & Taylor Co 

425.35 

0 

34686 

09/01/2020 

BAR009 

Bamum Companies, Inc 

72.15 

0 

34687 

09/01/2020 

BAT001 

Batteries + Bulbs 

76.89 

0 

34688 

09/01/2020 

AAA001 

Suzanne Bjomstad 

400.00 

0 

34689 

09/01/2020 

BR0002 

Brodart Co 

232.47 

0 

34690 

09/01/2020 

CAR005 

Carson Industries Inc 

99.95 

0 

34691 

09/01/2020 

CEN006 

Century Link 

61.89 

0 

34692 

09/01/2020 

CIN001 

Cintas Corporation No. 2 

173.35 

0 

34693 

09/01/2020 

GFC002 

City of Grand Forks 

154,322.50 

0 

34694 

09/01/2020 

CLL001 

CL Linfoot Co. 

680.17 

0 

34695 

09/01/2020 

COL004 

Coldspring Memorial 

885.00 

0 

34696 

09/01/2020 

COL002 

Cole Papers Inc 

377.82 

0 

34697 

09/01/2020 

COM003 

Complete Pest Control Inc 

280.00 

0 

34698 

09/01/2020 

CR0004 

Crookston Times 

99.00 

0 

34699 

09/01/2020 

CUL001 

Culinex 

96.50 

0 

34700 

09/01/2020 

FIL001 

Filter Care 

258.59 

0 

34701 

09/01/2020 

FOR005 

Forum Communications Company 

267.80 

0 

34702 

09/01/2020 

GRA0011 

Grainger 

54.05 

0 

34703 

09/01/2020 

GFW001 

Grand Forks Welding & Machine 

32.00 

0 

34704 

09/01/2020 

HWW001 

Grey House Publishing 

295.70 

0 

34705 

09/01/2020 

HAW001 

Hawkins Chemical 

4,584.00 

0 

34706 

09/01/2020 

HEA001 

Heartland Paper Company 

396.93 

0 

34707 

09/01/2020 

HOMOOl 

Home of Economy 

275.11 

0 

34708 

09/01/2020 

HOROOl 

Horizon Commercial Pool Supply 

1,536.10 

0 

34709 

09/01/2020 

INL001 

Inland Truck Parts & Service 

5,201.44 

0 

34710 

09/01/2020 

INT006 

Interstate Power Systems 

711.25 

0 

34711 

09/01/2020 

JOH026 

Johnson Controls 

2,400.05 

0 

34712 

09/01/2020 

JET002 

Johnson Jet-Line 

32,037.68 

0 

34713 

09/01/2020 

JUN001 

Junior Library Guild 

152.50 

0 

34714 

09/01/2020 

KAM001 

Kameron Harstad 

637.50 

0 

34715 

09/01/2020 

KEN002 

Kemiedy & Graven, Chartered 

426.00 

0 

34716 

09/01/2020 

KRI006 

Carter Krier 

92.00 

0 

34717 

09/01/2020 

LIT001 

Lithia Motors 

776.28 

0 

34718 

09/01/2020 

HAR081 

Local Ace 

433.01 

0 

34719 

09/01/2020 

HAR085 

Local Ace 

332.85 

0 

34720 

09/01/2020 

HAR088 

Local Ace 

25.96 

0 

34721 

09/01/2020 

HAR090 

Local Ace 

157.92 

0 

34722 

09/01/2020 

M&W001 

M&W Services 

493.00 

0 

34723 

09/01/2020 

MAR010 

Kevin Marcott 

725.00 

0 

34724 

09/01/2020 

MAR008 

Marshall and Polk Rural Water Systerr 

14.00 

0 

34725 

09/01/2020 

MCD001 

McDonald's of EGF 

50.16 

0 

34726 

09/01/2020 

MEN001 

Menards 

63.47 

0 

34727 

09/01/2020 

MID003 

Midcontinent Communications 

2,178.13 

0 


AP-Check Register Totals Only (08/28/2020 - 3:11 PM) 


Page 1 


46 




Check Date Vendor No Vendor Name 


Amount Voucher 


34728 

09/01/2020 

MID007 

Midwest Refrigeration Inc 

2,760.81 

0 

34729 

09/01/2020 

MND020 

Minnesota DEED 

788.44 

0 

34730 

09/01/2020 

MND013 

MN Dept of Transportation 

4,949.00 

0 

34731 

09/01/2020 

MOL001 

Molstad Excavating, Inc 

35,691.00 

0 

34732 

09/01/2020 

MTI001 

MTI Distributing Company 

225.52 

0 

34733 

09/01/2020 

NEW001 

Newman Signs Inc 

2,448.75 

0 

34734 

09/01/2020 

ORE001 

O'Reilly Automotive, Inc. 

931.19 

0 

34735 

09/01/2020 

OCLOOl 

OCLC, Inc. 

2,081.16 

0 

34736 

09/01/2020 

OSIOOl 

OSI Environmental Inc. 

100.00 

0 

34737 

09/01/2020 

OTI001 

Otis Elevator Company 

6,250.00 

0 

34738 

09/01/2020 

PET001 

Peterson Veterinary Clinic P.C. 

1,238.68 

0 

34739 

09/01/2020 

PLA001 

Play by Design 

13,721.00 

0 

34740 

09/01/2020 

POW003 

Powerplan OIB 

5,509.94 

0 

34741 

09/01/2020 

PRE001 

Premium Waters Inc 

75.09 

0 

34742 

09/01/2020 

QUI001 

Quill Corporation 

262.23 

0 

34743 

09/01/2020 

ROY002 

Royal Tire 

859.86 

0 

34744 

09/01/2020 

RYD001 

Rydell Chevrolet 

205.86 

0 

34745 

09/01/2020 

CHA001 

The Chamber of EGF/GF 

755.00 

0 

34746 

09/01/2020 

PRA005 

The Practice Place, PLLC 

400.00 

0 

34747 

09/01/2020 

THU002 

Thur-O-Clean 

4,302.50 

0 

34748 

09/01/2020 

TRI003 

Tri County Community Corrections 

73.50 

0 

34749 

09/01/2020 

USB005 

US Bank Corporate Payment System 

14,547.68 

0 

34750 

09/01/2020 

VAL002 

Valley Truck 

431.60 

0 

34751 

09/01/2020 

VIL001 

Vilandre Heating & A/C 

223.75 

0 

34752 

09/01/2020 

WAS002 

Wastequip 

3,332.00 

0 

34753 

09/01/2020 

WAT004 

WatchGuard Video 

6,470.00 

0 

34754 

09/01/2020 

WAT001 

Water & Light Department 

15,002.52 

0 

34755 

09/01/2020 

WID001 

Widseth Smith Nolting & Associates 

19,909.00 

0 

34756 

09/01/2020 

XCE001 

Xcel Energy 

1,966.25 

0 

34757 

09/01/2020 

ZOLOOl 

ZOLL Medical Corporation 

5,548.58 

0 




Check Total: 

367,911.46 



AP-Check Register Totals Only (08/28/2020 - 3:11 PM) 


Page 2 


47 








