■■ 


The  views  expiessed  in  this  paper  are  those  of  the  author 
and  do  not  necessarily  reflect  the  views  of  the 
Departn.ent  of  Defense  or  any  of  its  agencies.  This 
document  may  not  be  released  for  open  publication  untd 
it  has  been  cleared  by  the  appropriate  military  service  or 
goverrunent  agency. 


00 

o 

CSi 

ref 

I 

Q 


AIR  BASE  GROUND  DEFENSE 
ARE  WE  READY? 

BY 


LIEUTENANT  COLONEL  DALE  L.  LANDIS 


\ 


OlSnusnOH  STATEKBR  as  Affr«v«d  f«r  fublle 
dlstrllMtioa  is  tmliJilttd 


31  MARCH  1989 


DTIC 

ELECTE 
JUNO  8  1989 


U.S.  ARMY  WAR  COLLEGE,  CARLISLE  BARRACKS,  PA  17013-5050 


6  08  011 


89 


security  classification  of  This  race  (^»n  Oai«  EnrarvsD 


REPORT  DOCUMENTATION  PAGE 


I.  REPORT  number 


READ  INSTRUCTIONS 
BEFORE  COMPLETING  FORM 


2.  GOVT  ACCESSION  NO.l  3.  RECIPIENT'S  CATALOG  NUMBER 


4.  title  r«nd 


TYPE  OF  REPORT  4  PERIOD  COVERED 


Air  Base  Ground  Defense 


6.  performing  org.  report  nlmser 


7.  AuTHORr*; 

LtCol  Dale  L.  Landis,  USAF 


8.  contract  OR  grant  NUMBER/'#; 


9.  PERFORMING  ORGANIZATION  NAME  AND  ADDRESS 

U.S.  Army  War  College 
Carlisle  Barracks,  PA  17013 


10.  program  ELEMENT.  PROJECT.  TASK 
AREA  i  WORK  UNIT  NUMSEKS 


It.  CONTROLLING  OFFICE  NAME  ANO  ADDRESS 


12.  report  date 

April  1989 


Same 

I  13.  number  of  pages 

I  31 


14.  monitoring  agency  name  4  AOQRESS^U  dlHsr^t  from  ControHing  0//ic»;  ,  IS.  SECURITY  CLASS,  (ol  thi»  report) 

Unclassified 

ISa.~DECL  ASSI  F|C  ATI  ON  '  OoWnGR  AOIN^ 
SCHEDULE 


16.  DISTRIBUTION  STATEMENT  (at  Uiia  Reporr; 


Approved  for  public  release;  distribution  is  unlimited. 


17.  DISTRIBUTION  STATEMENT  (of  the  ebetrsct  anfarad  fn  Stack  20»  it  dlflarent  from  Report) 


19.  KEY  WORDS  (Continue  on  ravaraa  elde  If  necmoemry  end  Identity  by  block  number) 


20.  abstract  CCatrtlaue  an  ravaraa  ef^  If  rracaaaair  end  tdentllr  by  block  number) 

On  22  May  1984,  the  Chiefs  of  Staff  United  States  Army  and  Air 
Force  entered  into  a  memorandum  of  agreement  detailing  the  Joint 
Force  Developments  Process.  Part  of  that  agreement  included  an 
initiative  on  Air  Base  Ground  Defense.  This  portion  of  the  agree¬ 
ment  directed  the  Army  and  Air  Force  to  develop  a  Joint  Service 
Agreement  for  the  ground  defense  of  air  bases.  This  paper  exa¬ 
mines  recent  progress  by  the  services  and  what  still  needs  to  be 
done  to  insure  the  defense  of  air  assets.  Area 


DO  wn  edition  or  I  NOV  «s  is  oesoLerc  UNCLAS 

SCCURITT  CLASSIFICATION  OF  THIS  PA'.C  rWNwn  Dmim  Enfrmd) 


UNCLAS 


SECURITY  CLASSIFICATION  OF  THIS  PACEflThan  Dmtm  Bnfntl) 

force  structure,  training  and  command,  control,  communications 
and  intelligence  are  examined.  A  short  discussion  of  the  threat 
that  is  targeted  against  air  bases  is  also  included. 


Unclassified 


SECURITY  classification  OF  TmIS  PAGCfl»T>»n  Oat*  Enlmrmd) 


USAWC  MILITARY  STUDIES  PROGRAM  PAPER 


AIR  BASE  GROUND  DEFENSE 
ARE  WE  READY? 


AN  INDIVIDUAL  STUDY  PROJECT 


by 


Lieutenant  Colonel  Dale  L.  Landis,  USAF 


Colonel  Jerome  J.  Cornel lo 
Project  Advisor 


nSTRlBUnoil  STATEMERT  At  Approved  for  pobllc 
release^  dlatrlbution  is  unllaiite^ 


U,S.  Army  War  College 
Carlisle  Barracks,  Pennsylvania  17013 
31  March  19B9 


Ths  vleirs  sspressed  in  this  paper  are  those  of  the 
author  and  do  not  necessarily  reflect  the  views  of 
ths  Dspactnant  of  Defense  or  any  of  its  agencies. 

This  docunent  nay  not  be  released  for  open  publication 
until  it  has  been  cleared  by  the  appropriate  nllttarr 
service  or  governnent  agency. 


ABSTRACT 


AUTHOR:  Dale  L.  Landis,  Lt  Col,  USAF 

TITLE:  Air  Base  Ground  De-fense  -  Are  We  Ready? 

FORMAT:  Individual  Study  Project 

DATE:  1  April  1989  PAGES;  28  CLASSIFICATION;  Unclassified 

On  22  May  1984,  the  Chiefs  of  Staff  United  States  Army  and 
Air  Force  entered  into  a  memorandum  of  agreement  detailing  the 
Joint  Force  Developments  Process.  Part  of  that  agreement 
included  an  initiative  on  Air  Base  Ground  Defense.  This  portion 
of  the  agreement  directed  the  Army  and  Air  Force  to  develop  a 
Joint  Service  Agreement  for  the  ground  defense  of  air  bases. 
This  paper  examines  recent  progress  by  the  services  and  what 
still  needs  to  be  done  to  insure  the  defense  of  air  assets. 
Areas  of  doctrine,  force  structure,  training  and  command, 
control,  communications  and  intelligence  are  examined.  A  short 
discussion  of  the  threat  that  is  targeted  against  air  bases  is 
also  included. 


Accession  For 

NTIS  QRAAI 
DTIC  TAB 
Unamit'uiced 
Ju3i  1  r  ioaHon_ 


■y - - - - 

Distribution/ 

_Av«iiablllty  Codes 
lArell  and/er 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS 


Page 


ABSTRACT .  ii 

CHAPTER  I.  INTRODUCTION . . .  1 

II.  THREAT . 4 

III.  DISCUSSION .  6 

Doctrine . 6 

Force  Structure .  7 

Training .  9 

Command,  Control,  Communications 

and  Intelligence..... .  10 

IV.  ANALYSIS .  12 

Doctrine .  12 

Force  Structure .  13 

Training.. . 14 

Command,  Control,  Communications 

and  Intelligence .  15 

V.  CONCLUSIONS .  17 

VI.  RECOMMENDATIONS .  19 

Doctrine .  19 

Force  Structure .  20 

Training . 21 

Command,  Control,  Communications 

and  Intelligence .  22 

ENDNOTES .  24 

BIBLIOGRAPHY .  26 


AIR  BASE  GROUND  DEFENSE 
ARE  WE  READY? 

CHAPTER  I 

INTRODUCTION 

AirLand  Battle  doctrine  is  based  on  the  deployment  of  air 
assets,  along  with  ground  resources,  to  defeat  the  enemy.  Air 
assets,  both  Army  and  Air  Force,  and  in  contingency  operation, 
possibly  Naval  and  Marine  resources,  will  be  utilised  to  gain  air 
superiority,  support  ground  troops,  strike  second  echelon  forces 
and  interdict  deep  into  the  enemy's  battlefield. 

The  AirLand  Battle  doctrine  cannot  be  accomplished  without 
air  assets  and  it  is  certain  that  all  the  missions  listed  above 
for  the  air  components  are  necessary  for  the  successful 
completion  of  the  war,  wherever  it  might  occur.  Can  we  be 
assured  of  the  availability  of  these  air  assets?  Will  the  sortie 
rate  be  sufficient  to  meet  the  needs  of  the  theater  commander? 

It  is  certain  that  the  enemy's  doctrine  places  a  high 
priority  on  the  elimination  of  our  air  assets  prior  to  or 
immediately  at  the  beginning  of  a  conflict.  This  philosophy  is 
well  stated  in  Soviet  doctrine  and  the  necessary  forces  are 
dedicated  towards  that  end.l  If  the  threat  is  real  and  the  air 
assets  important,  what  in  beihf  dene  te  enaure  their 
avai 1 abi 1 i ty? 

The  Chiefs  of  Staff  United  States  Army  and  Air  Force  signed 


a  Memorandum  oi  Agreement  (MQA) ,  in  May  1984,  highligt  ing  the 
importance  o-f  the  de-fense  o-f  air  bases.  This  MOA,  along  with 
subsequent  documents  such  as  the  Joint  Service  Agreement  and  DAP 
525-1^4,  assigned  the  Army  the  mission  o-f  external  de-fense  o-f 
installations  while  assigning  the  Air  Force  internal  de-fense  of 
Air  Force  i nstal 1 ati ons. 2  Since  1984  the  Army  and  Air  Force  have 
been  trying  to  decide  how  best  to  implement  this  agreement.  This 
conversation  has  not  been  limited  to  these  two  services  as  the 
Navy  and  Marine  staffs  and  some  host  nations  have  also  been 
i nvol ved . 

This  paper  examines  the  services'  preparation  to  accomplish 
the  Air  Base  Ground  Defense  (ABGD)  mission  and,  where  found 
lacking,  offers  recommendations  for  continued  efforts.  First  the 
threat  will  be  examined  and  then  a  discussion  will  be  offered  on 
the  formulation  of  doctrine,  force  structure,  training,  and 
command,  control,  communications,  and  intelligence. 

Limiting  this  paper  to  the  European  scenario  would  be  a 
mistake.  The  likelihood  of  a  conflict  elsewhere  in  the  world  is 
far  greater  than  in  Europe  and  if  a  "third  world"  conflict,  such 
as  those  detailed  in  low  intensity  conflict  doctrine,  does  occur 
the  requirement  for  air  assets  may  be  just  as  important  as  in  the 
European  scenario.  The  defense  of  air  bases  in  these  contingency 
operations  offers  tremendous  challenges  to  all  involved.  Even 
though  this  risk  may  vary  depending  on  location,  the  discussions 
concerning  the  European  theater  usually  apply  to  contingency 
operations. 

Are  all  the  services  ready  to  meet  this  challenge?  Can  we 
defend  our  air  assets  to  ensure  their  availability?  Have  we  gone 


Is  everyone  on  the 


■far  enough  in  our  pursuit  of  this  subject? 
same  sheet  of  music  or  are  we  singing  different  lyrics  to  this 
difficult  melody?  Mhat  is  the  acceptable  risk  we  are  willing  to 
take  in  the  defense  of  our  air  assets?  This  paper  will  look  at 
these  questions  through  a  review  of  the  threat,  a  discussion  of 
the  areas  of  concern  mentioned  above,  an  analysis  of  the 
discussion  areas  and  then  offer  some  recommendations  on  where  we 
should  head  in  the  future. 

It  is  recognized  that  these  issues  are  evolving,  dynamic  and 
controversial.  This  paper  is  a  snapshot  of  the  issues  taken  by 
the  author  who  is  very  interested  in  this  iniportant  subject. 


CHAPTER  II 


THREAT 


Sortie  reduction  can  occur  through  air  attack,  maintenance, 
combat  loss  and  ground  attack,  to  name  a  -few  causes. 
Notwithstanding  the  importance  o-f  all  -forms  o-f  loss,  this  paper 
will  concentrate  on  the  ground  threat  and  its  de-feat.  We 
concentrate  our  thoughts  on  special  war-fare  -forces  (Spetsnaz) 
and/or  Operational  Maneuver  Groups  (DMG) ,  and  although  this  may 
be  the  major  concern  in  Europe,  we  should  also  look  at  the  wide 
spectrum  o-f  ground  threats. 

EiSid  t!®ny§l.  states  that  a  "major  element  of 
Soviet  doctrine  is  the  disruption  of  our  rear  area  to  reduce  our 
efficiency  and  support  to  the  main  battle  area. "3  The  Soviets 
will  accomplish  this  by  targeting  command  and  control  centers, 
airfields,  nuclear  weapons  facilities,  communications  sites,  as 
well  as  troop  concentrations.  The  enemy  will  reach  these  targets 
via  air-dropped,  airlanded,  and/or  amphibious  units. 4 

A  recent  Janej.s  Defense  Weekly  article  emphasized  the 
importance  of  air  base  destruction  to  the  Soviet  doctrine.  The 
article  detailed  Soviet  exercises  to  accomplish  this  primary 
objective  of  their  special  purpose  forces. 5  So  important  is  this 
to  the  Soviets  that  27,000  to  30,000  forces  are  trained  for  this 
mission. 6  Likewise,  the  North  Koreans  have  100,000  ranger- 
commandos  tasked  with  the  same  mission. 7  Not  all  of  these  forces 
will  attack  airfields;  however,  an  installation  commander  cannot 


4 


disregard  .nis  threat. 

The  installation  commander  must  also  be  ready  to  detect  and 
defeat  other  levels  of  enemy  threat.  Most  documents  list  three 
levels  to  include  agents,  saboteurs,  terrorists,  and  partisans 
(Level  I);  unconventional  forces  (Spetsnaz)  and  tactical  units  of 
less  than  battalion  size  (Level  II);  and  finally,  tactical  units 
of  battalion  size  or  larger  (Level  III). 8 

These  threats  cover  the  wide  sprectrum  of  forces  confronting 
the  defenders  of  an  airfield  whether  that  airfield  is  located  in 
Europe  or  elsewhere  in  the  world.  It  appears  that  a  contir^ 
risk  to  overseas  installations  exists.  Airfields  will  not  be 
targeted  at  all  times  but  installation  commanders  must  prepare  to 
defend  bases  at  all  times,  even  during  nonhostile  periods.  To 
counter  these  threats  will  take  a  well  defined  doctrine,  specific 
training,  coordinated  command  and  control  as  well  as  su+'  +  iciert 
force  structi'.re. 


tmap'^ep  r  r  i 

D  I'rCL'EE  ION 

The  signing  of  the  MOA  bv  Chiete  o-  the  Army  and  Air 
Force  Stat+s  on  22  Mav  1984  changed  the  way  air  bases  had  been 
de+ensed.  A  well  researched  history  o-f  the  development  ot  air 
base  ground  defense  is  detailed  in  Lt  Col  Michael  Wheeler's 
military  studies  project  dated  19  May  1986.  Suffice  it  to  say 
that  the  Air  Force  was  the  prime  provider  of  defense  before  May 
1984.9 

Since  May  1984  the  Army  and  Air  Force  have  been  working 
diligently  to  implement  the  MOA.  The  areas  of  doctrine,  force 
structure,  training,  equipment  and  command,  control, 
communications  and  intelligence  continue  to  provide  challenges. 

DOCIRINE 

Based  on  the  MOA,  Generals  Wickham  and  Gabriel  signed  a 
Joint  Agreement  on  25  April  1985  detailing  the  policies  for  the 
ground  defense  of  Air  Force  bases  and  installations.  This 
Agreement  was  to  "be  used  to  guide  appropriate  Army  and  Air  Force 
regulations,  manuals,  publications  and  curricula."  It  was  also  to 
be  the  basis  for  "future  development  of  joint  doctrine  and 
supporting  procedures. " 10  Joint  Service  Agreement  8,  as  this 
document  became  known,  among  other  things,  defined  terms, 
provided  background  and  assigned  responsibilities. 


6 


Subsequently,  the  Army  and  Air  Force  have  met  at  all  levels 


to  determine  the  best  approach  to  the  de-fense  of  air  bases.  As 
defined  in  JSA  8,  the  Army  is  "responsible  for  providing  forces 
for  ABGD  operations  outside  the  boundaries  of  designated 
bases. "11  The  document  further  states  "when  assigned  the  ABGD 
mission...,  Army  forces  will  be  under  the  operational  control  of 
those  Air  Force  base  commanders. " 12  Both  services  continue  to 
struggle  with  the  implications  of  these  two  statements. 

Using  the  JSA  as  the  basis  for  joint  doctrine,  the  services 
at  all  levels  attacked  the  problem  of  providing  base  defense.  A 
Joint  Air  Base  Ground  Defense  Working  Group  <JABGDWG)  was 
formed. 13  Action  officers  from  the  Air  Force  Office  of  Security 
Police,  the  Army  Staff,  TRADOC,  TAG  and  most  recently  the  Air 
Land  Force  Application  (ALFA)  Agency  have  offered  documents 
detailing  the  defense  of  installations.  Many  of  these  documents 
remain  in  draft. 

One  joint  document,  DAP  525-^4  and  AFP  206-4,  was  published 
in  July  1986  and  remains  the  foundation  publication  for  the 
"Joint  Operational  Concept  for  Air  Base  Ground  Defense"  -  its 
title. 


FORCE  STRUCTURE 


With  the  assignment  of  an  increased  mission  via  JSA  8,  the 

Army  received  no  additional  manpower.  JSA  8  authorized  the  Army 

to  solicit  host  nation  support  for  the  purpose  of  ABGD  wherever 

possible.  Only  in  Germany  have  host  nation  troops  been  assigned 
the  direct  mission  of  ABGD.  Efforts  are  underway  for  similar 


7 


support  within  the  United  Kingdom.  Some  nations  indicate  units 
will  be  available  but  re-fuse  to  test  their  response  capability  at 
this  time. 

The  Air  Force  desires  dedicated  -forces  assigned  to  each 
installation  and,  where  there  are  not  host  nation  -forces,  has 
requested  the  Army  to  provide  those  units.  Within  the  Army,  rear 
area  de-fense  is  a  Military  Police  mission;  however,  limited 
manpower  does  not  permit  the  dedication  o-f  forces  to  air  bases. 
There  is  no  indication  the  Military  Police  (MP)  are  going  to 
receive  additional  manpower  to  conduct  the  AB6D  mission.  Many  of 
the  MP  units  are  reserve  and  national  guard  assets  and  their  in¬ 
theater  arrival  may  be  too  late  for  the  defense  of  air  assets. 

The  Air  Force  recently  adjusted  part  of  its  deployable 
security  police  forces  to  meet  not  only  the  ABGD  mission  but  to 
also  handle  contingency  situations  such  as  Panama  and  Clark  AFB. 
These  new  Contingency  Security  Elements  are  13-man  squads 
controlled  by  five  MAJCOMs  and  located  regionally  to  respond 
quickly  to  expanded  roles  and  missions.  With  prepositioned 
equipment  and  intensive  training  these  units  will  provide  the  Air 
Force  with  additional  capability  to  meet  the  base  defense  mission 
as  well  as  other  functions. 14 

Other  rear  area  forces  that  possibly  could  be  used  in  the 
ABGD  role  are  the  combat  support  (CS)  and  combat  service  support 
(CSS)  units.  These  units,  plus  those  combat  troops  in  reserve  or 
rest,  provide  defense  of  the  rear  area  to  include  airfields. 

These  Army  units,  deployable  Air  Force  and  Army  Military 

Police  units  plus  in-theater  forces,  are  available  to  the 
installation  commander  for  the  defense  of  his  critical  air 


8 


assets.  This  commander  must  also  consider  other  Air  Force 
support  -forces  assigned  to  him  -for  possible  use  in  base  de-fense 
activities.  No  additional  -forces  appear  available  in  the 
foreseeable  future. 

Tactical  sensor  systems  appear  to  be  a  tremendous  force 
multiplier  for  the  ABGD  mission.  Sensors  keep  defenders  in  the 
response  mode  versus  the  detection  role-  Both  the  Army  and  Air 
Force  are  working  diligently  to  field  improved  systems. 

IBAINING 

With  the  implementation  of  JSA  9,  an  agreement  fostered  by 
the  31  initiatives  of  May  84,  the  Army  assumed  the  responsibility 
to  train  Air  Force  personnnel  for  air  base  ground  defense.  Three 
courses  were  establihed  at  Ft  Dix,  NJ ,  to  accomplish  this  task. 

Course  I  trains  airmen/sergeants  (E1-E4)  for  23  days  in 
basic  combat  skills.  Course  II  develops  combat  skills  necessary 
for  a  squad  leader  to  operate.  These  sergeants/master  sergeants 
(E4-E7)  receive  five  weeks  of  training.  Leadership  skills 
necessary  for  a  1 i eutenant /captai n  (01-03)  to  perform  his  ABGD 
mission  are  covered  in  nine  week  Course  IV. 15 

Senior  Air  Force  officer  training  in  ABGD  skills  remains  at 
Lackland  Air  Force  Base,  TX.  Other  Air  Force  support  personnel, 
who  are  not  normally  armed,  receive  only  firearms  training  at 
basic  training  and  then  again  while  stationed  overseas. 

Army  Military  Police  training  provides  the  skills  necessary 

to  perform  the  ABGD  mission.  Training  takes  place  at  each  course 
MP  personnel  attend.  The  basic  course  emphasizes  small  unit 


9 


tactics  while  the  NCO  and  officer  courses  stress  unit  leadership. 
CS  and  CSS  units  are  trained  and  equipped  for  a  benign  tactical 
environment.  Host  nation  units  are  yet  to  be  tested  in  the  ABGD 
mission;  however  it  is  obvious  they  will  be  familiar  with  the 
terrain  and  dedicated  to  the  defense  of  their  homeland.  The 
advanced  age  of  host  nation  reservists,  their  endurance,  and  the 
timeliness  of  recall  could  present  a  problem- 

COMMANDj.  CQNIROLj.  CamUNICAIIONS  AND  INIELL IGENCE 

For  any  operation  to  be  successful  good  command,  control, 
communications  and  intelligence  (C3I)  are  necessary.  Joint 
operations  have  highlighted  problems  in  these  areas.  Joint  ABGD 
exercises  have  not  proven  differently.  CORPS  DEFENDER  86 
surfaced  FM  doctrinal  questions  concerning  the  chain  of 
command,  control,  communications,  and  intelligence.  All  were 
found  to  be  "operationally  reactive  rather  than  proactive"  - 
surrendering  the  initiative  to  the  threat. 16 

Units  dedicated  to  ABGD,  as  indicated  in  the  MOA,  are  to  be 
under  the  operational  control  of  the  base  commander. 
Installation  commanders  are  not  trained  in  ground  defense  and  may 
delegate  ABGD  command  to  their  Chief,  Security  Police.  Under 
contingency  operations,  the  Marines  may  have  secured  the 
installation  and  Marine  air  assets  may  be  operating  from  the 
base. 

Mhoever  is  in  command  will  face  a  tremendous  control 

problem.  Fire  control,  especially  with  the  range  of  available 
weapons,  will  require  coordination  between  established  base 


10 


defense  operations  centers  (BDOC)  and  the  rear  area  operation 
center  (RAOC) . 

Communications  is  key  to  the  command  and  control  of  ABGD 
forces.  Radios  must  interface  and  some  form  of  secure  voice  must 
be  established.  Presently  secure  communications  is  accomplished 
via  Communi cat i ons-El ectroni c  Operating  Instructions  (CEOIs). 
All  the  services  are  developing  new  radios  with  secure  voice 
capability.  Phase  I  of  the  Scope  Shield  tactical  radio  buy  is  to 
be  completed  in  May  1989.17  ABGB  exercises  still  test  the  use  of 
land  lines  and  messengers. 

Intelligence  is  key  to  the  understanding  of  the  battlefield. 
The  Army  has  well  defined  units  capable  of  performing  rear  area 
intelligence  operations.  Air  Force  Regyiation  20§-2  outlines  the 
intelligence  support  responsibilities.  US  Air  Force 
Intelligence,  Air  Force  Office  of  Special  Investigations  and  the 
Security  Police  are  all  tasked  to  provide  combat  information  and 
intelligence  col  1 ecti on . 18  Exercises,  such  as  CORPS  DEFENDER, 
Brim  Frost  and  Salty  Demo,  indicate  responsibilities  are  not 
being  accomplished  as  the  directive  specifies. 

The  Air  Base  Survivability  Capability  Demonstration  (Salty 
Demo)  conducted  at  Spangdahlem  Air  Base,  Germany  in  April /May 
1985  clearly  demonstrated  the  importance  of  ground  intelligence. 
Without  off  base  gathering  of  intelligence  and  the  detection  and 
destruction  of  the  enemy,  air  operations  will  certainly  be 
affected  by  lost  sorties. 19 


CHAPTER  IV 


ANALYSIS 

Analysing  the  AB6D  mission  and  its  players  has  occupied  the 
attention  o-f  numerous  sta-f-f  members  and  contractor  personnel  -for 
sometime.  Several  large  exercises,  Salty  Demo  -for  example,  have 
tested  the  procedures.  All  this  effort  has  resulted  in  numerous 
findings  and  even  more  recommendations  on  what  is  wrong  with  our 
doctrine,  the  execution  of  that  doctrine,  force  structure 
problems,  training  deficiencies  and  C3I  confusions  that  will 
effect  mission  accomplishment.  Limited  progress  has  been  made  as 
evidenced  by  the  most  recent  Brim  Frost  89  exercise.  Many  of  the 
same  problems  found  at  Brim  Frost  87  still  exist.  Likewise, 
CORPS  DEFENDER  86,  the  Army's  largest  rear  area  operation 
exercise,  even  found  the  rear  area  doctrine  of  Army  FM  90-14 
lacking. 20 


doctrine 

The  JCS  has  not  written  any  doctrine  specifically  addressing 
ABGD.  The  Army  and  Air  Force  are  working  together,  and  sometimes 
alone,  to  formulate  doctrine  to  meet  their  own  interpretation  of 
the  MOA.  The  Air  Force  Office  of  Security  Police  (AFOSP)  is 
coordinating  a  new  AFR  206-2  which  provides  Air  Force  doctrine  on 
this  subject.  This  draft  differs  somewhat  from  current  Army 
doctrine  contained  in  Army  FM  90-^4  and  DAP  525M4.  The 


12 


definition  of  an  installation's  geographical  boundary  and  not 
relying  on  MP  support  for  external  defense  are  two  di f f erences. 21 
Further  complicating  this  doctrinal  question  is  the  "in 
coordination"  TRADOC/TAC  publication  XQ  Ar A^r 

EQC£§  Q90£§Bt  for  Rear  Security  QBg!I§ti9D5j  snd  the  Air  Land 
Forces  Application  (ALFA)  Agency  draft  TC  2Q-i2j.  Multi -Service 
E!C9£®^y!Ig§  f9C  th®  0§f§Q§§  9f  §  !29i.C>t  i§se,  document.  These  two 
documents  do  not  reflect  the  present  Army  and  Air  Force  doctrine. 
Nor,  in  all  cases,  do  threat  definitions  even  match.  The  two 
documents  do  not  coincide  with  current  information  contained  in 
the  new  AFR  206^2.22 

Furthermore,  the  JABGDUIG  has  not  met  since  Feb  198^>.  At  that 
time  the  Army  terminated  the  meetings  indicating  work  was 
completed  on  JSA  8.  The  Air  Force  Deputy  Chief  of  Staff  for 
Operations  recently  sent  a  letter  to  the  Army  Staff  asking  for 
renewal  of  the  JABGDWG.23  Initially,  this  group  proved  to  be  an 
excellent  forum  for  working  joint  problems. 

EQRQi  siRUCTURE 

Force  structure  still  offers  the  widest  divergence  between 

Army  and  Air  Force  staffers.  The  Air  Force  wants  dedicated  host 

nation,  Army  or  Marine  forces  to  provide  external  defense  to 

installations.  The  Army,  as  well  as  the  Marines,  feel  Air  Force 

installations  should  be  protected  as  any  other  resource  in  the 

rear  area  -  installation  personnel  should  provide  defense 

against  Level  I  and  II  threats  while  rear  area  support  forces,  in 
most  cases  Military  Police  units,  should  respond  to  threats  on  an 

13 


"as  needed"  basis.  Priority  of  response  is  key  to  this  doctrine. 

Capt  Robert  Kenyon,  in  his  Military  Police  Jgyrnai  article, 
clearly  amplifies  the  prevalent  Army  feeling  by  stating,  "The 
position  that  Army  units  must  be  dedicated  to  the  defense  of 
□CONUS  air  bases  is  untenable  with  the  current  Army  force 
structure. "24 

CS,  CSS  and  combat  units  in  the  rear  area,  plus  on  base 
personnel,  must  be  added  into  the  ABGD  equation.  Questions  of 
training  and  arming  need  to  be  worked  to  ensure  their  usefulness 
to  the  installation  command.  Lack  of  radios,  crew-served  weapons, 
dedicated  or  organic  indirect  fire,  or  dedicated  aviation  must  be 
consi dered. 25 

Tactical  sensor  systems  may  be  a  practical  solution  to  the 
lack  of  manpower.  Detection  of  the  enemy  located  outside  the 
installation  is  paramount  to  his  defeat  and  the  reduction  of 
sortie  loss.  Sensors  place  forces  in  a  reaction  mode  instead  of  a 
detection  role.  Not  detecting  the  enemy  external  to  the 
installation  could  create  a  standoff  threat. 

Allowing  the  enemy  to  use  standoff  weapons  to  close  the 
runways  is  not  acceptable.  The  Rand  Study  on  risk  to  tactical 
aircraft  highlights  potential  sortie  loss  to  this  threat. 
Without  dedicated  forces,  internal  security  police  forces  will 
find  it  difficult  to  counter  this  highly  mobile  threat. 26 

TRAINING 


Training  of  Air  Force  personnel  at  Ft  Dix  is  proving 


14 


successful  but  with  the  announcement  of  the  closure  of  Ft  Dix 
this  operation  requires  further  attention.  Previously,  ABGD 
training  was  accomplished  at  Camp  Bullis,  an  Army  installation 
outside  San  Antonio,  TX.  Since  Security  Police  specialty 
training  is  accomplished  at  Lackland  AFB,  TX  (San  Antonio)  those 
individuals  attending  ABGD  training  either  stayed  at  Lackland  or 
were  housed  in  tents  at  Camp  Bullis.  No  travel  expense  was 
necessary  to  move  these  students  and  training  days  were 
max i mi  zed . 

Since  housing  will  be  critical  at  any  Army  post  (the  Base 
Closure  Committee  recommended  ABGD  training  be  moved  to  Ft  Knox, 
KV)  but  since  Lackland  now  has  empty  quarters,  it  appears  more 
appropriate  to  move  ABGD  training  (along  with  Army  instructors 
now  at  Ft  Dix)  back  to  Camp  Bullis.  If  additional  ranges  are 
needed  for  heavy  weapons  training.  Ft  Hood,  TX  could  provide  such 
ranges. 

Training  of  host  nation  personnel  for  ABGD  must  also  be 
ensured.  Continuous  testing  of  these  units  is  essential  to  gain 
confidence  in  their  ability  to  perform  the  mission. 

CQMMANDj.  CONIRgLj.  COMMUNICATIONS  AND  INJELLIGENCE 

Without  the  proper  C3I  the  ABGD  mission  is  doomed  to 
failure.  Past  exercises  have  not  added  to  the  confidence  level 
of  our  ability  to  perform.  Interface  with  Army  units  continues 
to  be  weak  as  secure  voice  communications  are  not  available. 
CORPS  DEFENDER  86  found  C3I  functions  critically  lacking. 

Current  doctrine  lacks  unity  of  command  and  coordination  of 


15 


■fire. 27  Who  will  be  in  charge  and  make  the  critical  decisions 
that  will  result  in  the  success-ful  de-fense  o-f  air  bases  is  still 
uncertain.  The  Air  Force  believes  the  base  commander  to  be  in 
charge  while  the  Army  holds  the  ranking  o-f-ficer  in  the  rear  area 
responsi bl e. 

Control  of  indirect  fire  must  receive  additional  attention. 
The  Air  Force  possesses  MK  19  grenade  launchers  and  will  be 
firing  this  weapon  to  the  rear  of  external  forces.  Control  of 
all  indirect  fire  is  essential  for  the  safety  of  forces. 

The  Air  Force  Scope  Shield  radio  buy  will  assist  in  the 
communications  area  tremendously.  The  Phase  I  buy  is  to  be 
completed  in  May  1989  and  Phase  II,  which  includes  secure  voice, 
is  under  contract.  The  Army  and  Marines  are  considering  entering 
into  this  buy. 

Battlefield  intelligence,  especially  Air  Force  involvement, 
is  lacking.  Neither  Air  Force  Intelligence  nor  the  Air  Force 
Office  of  Special  Investigation  wants  the  mission.  Both  state 
manpower  resources  are  not  available  to  support  this  wartime 
mi ssi on. 


16 


CHAPTER  V 


CONCLUSIONS 

The  action  o-f  General  John  A.  Wickham,  U.S.  Army  Chief  of 
Staff  and  General  Charles  A.  Gabriel,  U.S.  Air  Force  Chief  of 
Staff,  on  22  May  1984  was  the  "initial  step  in  the  establishment 
of  a  long-term,  dynamic  process  whose  objective  will  continue  to 
be  the  fielding  of  the  most  affordable  and  effective  airland 
combat  forces. "28  After  nearly  five  years  of  efforts  by  the  Army 
and  Air  Force  to  implement  the  direction  of  the  Chiefs,  the 
defense  of  air  assets  may  not  be  as  advanced  as  these  two  men 
envi si oned. 

The  Air  Force  is  now  training  its  personnel  solely  for 
internal  defense  of  installations  and  not  preparing  to  counter 
the  threat  that  could  slow  or  even  stop  air  operations  from 
external  positions  to  the  airfield.  The  Army  is  prepared  to 
provide  forces  in  prioritization  of  threats.  By  the  time  Army 
forces  arrive,  damage  could  be  enough  to  force  the  closure  of 
airfields  -  denying  air  assets  to  the  airland  battle  or  to 
contingency  operations. 

Based  on  risk  assessments  and  exercise  results,  such  as 
Salty  Demo,  the  lack  of  base  defense  during  any  conflict  could 
result  in  loss  of  aircraft  sorties.  In  the  European  scenario 
enemy  forces  are  targeted  against  the  airfield  destruction 
mission.  In  contingency  operations  agents,  saboteurs,  partisans, 
and  terrorists  could  attempt  to  disrupt  air  operations.  To 


17 


assure  air  operations  the  threat  must  be  neutralized.  To 
successfully  accomplish  this  mission,  in  accordance  with  the 
existing  MQA,  joint  operations  are  essential. 

Recommendations  that  could  improve  our  ability  to  perform 
the  ABGD  mission  are  offered  in  the  next  chapter. 
Recommendations  on  doctrine,  force  structure,  training  and 
command,  control,  communications  and  intelligence  are  prioritized 
within  each  subject  area.  Almost  all  the  recommendations  cost 
very  little  money  but  do  require  the  time  of  Headquarters 
personnel . 


IS 


CHAPTER  VI 


RECOMMENDATIONS 

Each  exercise  or  joint  meeting  results  in  numerous 
recommendations  that  et-fect  how  ABGD  is  accomplished. 
Recognizing  the  di-f-ficulty  in  -formulating  joint  policy  and 
understanding  the  importance  o-f  the  de-fense  o-f  our  air  assets 
requires  the  utmost  attention  be  placed  on  this  subject. 
Agreements  must  be  formulated  between  the  services  and  host 
nations  to  ensure  the  proper  defense  of  air  assets  is  available 
to  reduce  the  heavy  price  of  sortie  loss.  Action  after  the  fact 
will  not  ensure  air  assets  when  most  needed  -  at  the  beginning  of 
the  conflict.  We  will  get  only  one  opportunity.  It  is  apparent 
that  joint  doctrine  is  the  key  to  our  ABGD  problems. 

The  Air  Force  must  be  prepared  to  defend  installations  with 
available  personnel.  Deployable  forces  may  not  arrive  before 
attacks  take  place.  The  enemy  is  likely  to  attempt  to  destroy 
air  assets  prior  to  or  at  the  outbreak  of  hostilities.  Not 
preparing  for  such  a  possibility  could  result  in  unacceptable 
loss  of  air  assets.  It  may  be  necessary  to  move  aircraft  from 
threatened  installations  until  security  can  be  assured. 

DOCTRINE 

It  is  essential  Army  and  Air  Force  staffs  work  out  their 
differences  on  whether  dedicated  forces  are  available  for  the 


19 


ABGD  mission. 


If  the  Air  Force  is  responsible  for  more  than 


internal  defense  of  its  installations  the  doctrine  of  MOA  3  must 
change.  Air  Force  personnel  must  be  trained  to  meet  that  mission 
and  increased  emphasis  on  sensor  systems  is  needed.  The  Air 
Force,  before  MOA  8,  exercised  its  capabilities  to  handle  both 
internal  and  external  defense  of  installations.  Sufficient 
forces  were  not  available  to  counter  the  threat  at  that  time. 

One  body  must  write  ABGD  doctrine  instead  of  the  present 
divergence  of  the  responsibility.  Doctrine  should  start  at  JCS 
and  then  be  expanded  at  the  service  staff  level.  The  Army  staff 
and  the  Air  Force  Office  of  Security  Police  are  the  primary 
agencies  of  ABGD  doctrine.  Jointly  the  staffs  should  write  and 
coordinate  doctrine.  Subordinate  organisations  should  coordinate 
their  documents  with  the  appropriate  headquarters  staff  before 
coordinating  draft  to  ensure  compliance  with  present  philosophy. 

The  JABGDWG  should  meet  regularly  to  solve  ABGD  problems. 
The  Deputy  Chief  of  Staff  for  Operations  request  for  renewal  of 
the  group  should  be  approved.  The  group  should  be  expanded  to 
include  the  Marines.  This  group  should  provide  guidance  to  the 
headquarter  staffs  on  the  appropriate  approach  in  solving  ABGD 
problems. 


FORCE  biRUCTURE 


It  is  essential  that  we  know  what  forces  are  going  to  be 

available  to  accomplish  this  important  mission.  Each 

installation  commander  must  know  what  staffing  is  available. 
Removal  of  air  assets  from  the  installation  may  be  the  best 


alternative  i -f  de-fense  is  not  available.  Heavy  loss  o-f  aircra-ft 
to  the  ground  threat  should  not  be  accepted. 

It  Army  units  are  not  going  to  be  dedicated  to  installations 
and  the  Army  is  to  maintain  external  detense  ot  airtields  then 
those  units  assigned  the  response  role  should  be  airmobile.  For 
this  to  occur,  MP  units  require  dedicated  air  units  stationed  in 
the  rear  area. 

Host  nation  commitments  must  be  soliditied.  Additional 
countries  should  be  approached  concerning  this  mission.  Host 
nation  support  appears  to  be  the  best  source  tor  manpower  to 
pertoriu  the  ABGD  mission.  The  Army  is  entrusted  to  work  this 
source  ot  manpower. 

The  Services  should  continue  to  investigate  the  uses  ot  CS, 
CSS,  combat  units  in  the  rear  and  base  support  personnel  in  the 
detense  ot  Air  Force  installations.  It  these  units  are  to  be 
used,  increased  firepower  is  required.  The  Army  needs  to  add 
MK19  and  M-60s  to  these  unit  TOAs.  MO  units  should  acquire  added 
tirepower  to  counter  the  Level  II  and  III  threats.  Antitank  and 
mortar  capability  should  be  assessed. 29 

IRAINING 

To  save  travel  monies  and  training  days,  all  ABGD  training, 
upon  the  closure  ot  Ft  Dix,  should  be  accomplished  at  Lackland 
AFB  and  Camp  Bull  is,  TX.  Ranges  could  be  provided  by  Ft  Hood. 
Army  instructors  should  continue  to  be  used  to  ensure  Air  Force 

personnel  receive  the  highest  level  of  combat  skill  training. 

Senior  Air  Force  officers,  who  will  be  responsible  for 


21 


command  and  control  of  the  ABGD  mission,  should  receive 
additional  training.  Base  commanders  could  receive  this 
instruction  at  Maxwell  AFE,  A1  during  the  Base  Commander's 
course.  Knowledge  of  Army  and  Marine  capabilities  is  essential. 
Participation  in  joint  exercises  must  continue  to  give  senior  Air 
Force  officers  the  opportunity  to  hone  their  ABGD  skills. 

COMMANDj.  CQNIROLi  CQMMUNiQAIIQNS  AND  INIELLIGENCE 

Use  of  the  most  skilled  and  ranking  commander  should  be 
considered  in  the  execution  of  the  ABGD  mission.  The  Air  Force 
installation  commander  may  not  always  be  in  the  best  position  to 
accomplish  this  task.  Most  senior  Air  Force  officers  lack 
experience  and  training  in  command  and  control  of  ABGD 
activities.  There  is  still  ambiguity  as  to  who  should  be  in 
charge. 

Indirect  fire  control  requires  continuous  review.  Present 
procedures  appear  to  be  lacking.  The  AC-130  gunship  could 
provide  fire  support  and  at  the  same  time  deliver  accurate 
firepower  to  the  ABGD  role.  All  policymakers  must  direct  their 
attention  to  this  important  problem. 

The  confusion  concerning  which  Air  Force  agency  is  going  to 
provide  combat  intelligence  must  be  solved.  The  Air  Force  Office 
of  Special  Investigations  appears  to  be  most  capable;  however, 
increased  manpower  may  be  required.  Reserve  personnel, 
specifically  trained  in  the  area  of  combat  intelligence,  could  be 
the  solution. 

Communication  capabilities  require  improvement.  For  the  Air 


Force  the  Scope  Shield  radio  will  provide  highly  e-f-fective 
communications'  capability.  The  Army  and  Marines  should  continue 
to  show  an  interest  in  this  system. 


ENDNOTES 


1.  Viktor  Survorov,  "Spetsnaz ,  The  Soviet  Union's  Special 

Forces,"  Joint  Fgrcej.  Dgctringj.  and  Planning,  Vol  1,  1980,  p. 

426. 

2.  U.S.  Departments  o-f  the  Army  and  the  Air  Force, 
"Memorandum  o-f  Agreement  on  U.S.  Army  -  U.S.  Air  Force  Joint 
Development  Process,"  22  May  1984,  p.  2. 

3.  U.S.  Department  of  the  Army,  Army  Eigid  Manual  20-14^ 
Rgar  Battle,  10  June  1988,  pp.  1-2. 

l^id. ,  p.  1-3. 

5.  "Airbase  Defense  Soviet  Priority,"  Jangls  Dgfgnsg 
Wgekly,  30  July  1988,  p.  177. 

6.  John  M.  Halliday,  lactigal  Disggrsal  gf  Eightgr 

Aircrafts,  Rigk^  yQcectSiDti'j.  Policy  6®E9aj<DgDd®li2D§ i  February 

1987,  p7  227 

7.  Ralph  C.  Marinaro,  BG,  "Rear  Operations  Doctrines  A 
Reevaluation  -  Part  I,"  Military  Police*  Spring  1987,  p.  6. 

8.  Eigid  Manual  90-14,  pp.  1-3  -  1-4  and  U.S.  Department  of 

the  Army,  BeESCtlDSQt  9f  BCIDY  EslDBblei  §25-14  and  Air  E9EES 

Pamghlgt  2O634,  p.  4. 

9.  Michael  I.  Wheeler,  Lt  Col,  USAF,  The  Reality  gf  Afr 
i§ie  Grgund  Defense,  pp.  3-21. 

10.  U.S.  Departments  of  the  Army  and  the  Air  Force,  "Joint 
Service  Agreement  -  USA-USAF  Agreement  for  the  Ground  Defense  of 
the  Air  Force  Bases  and  Installations,"  p.  A-1. 

11-  Ibid. 

12.  Ibid.,  p.  3. 

13.  Ibid. 

14.  Tex  Hawkins,  Col,  USAF,  Point  Paggr  gn  Cgntingency 
Security  Elements,  6  May  1988,  p.l. 

15.  John  T.  Salley,  Ma j ,  USAF,  "Trip  Report  -  In  Process 
Review  of  Ground  Combat  Skills  Training,"  undated,  pp.  1-4. 

16.  Marinaro,  p.6. 

17.  Richard  Coleman,  Lt  Col,  USAF,  Hq  Air  Force  Office  of 


Security  Police,  Kirtland  AFB,  N.M. ,  5  December  1988. 

18.  U.S.  Department  of  the  Air  Force,  Hq  Air  Force  Office  of 
Security  Pi_lice,  Air  Force  Regulation  20§r2j.  Vol.  1,  pp.  43-44. 

19.  Halliday,  p.  2. 

20.  Marinaro,  p.  6- 

21.  James  C.  Harper,  Ma j ,  USAF,  Hq  Air  Force  Office  of 
Security  Police,  Kirtland  AFB,  N.H. ,  h  December  1988. 

22.  U.S.  Army  Training  Command  and  Hq  USAF  TAC,  IC90-14/TACP 
XXzXX/PACAFP  XX^XX/ySAFEP  XX-XX/AACP  XX^XX,  p.3. 

23.  Frank  Willingham,  Lt  Col,  USAF,  Office  of  the  Secretary 
of  the  Air  Force,  Office  of  the  Security  Police,  Washington,  10 
November  1988. 

24.  Robert  W.  Kenyon,  CPT,  "Air  Base  Ground  Defense:  Issue 
in  Defense,"  Military  Poiice,  October  1988,  p.  11. 

25.  Marinaro,  p.  7. 

26.  Halliday,  p.  iii. 

27.  Marinaro,  p.  7. 

28.  "Memorandum  of  Agreement  on  U.S.  Army-U.S.  Air  Force 
Joint  Development  Process,"  p.  1. 

29.  Ralph  C.  Marinaro,  BG,  "Rear  Operations  Doctrine:  A 
Reevaluation  -  Part  II,"  Military  Poiice,  September  1987,  p.  12. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


1.  "Airbase  De-fense  Soviet  Priority."  i2§Q§ls  5§f§Qs§ 
Weekl.^,  Vol  10  Number  4,  30  July  1988,  p.  177. 

2.  Air  Force  0-f-fice  o-f  Security  Police.  "ABGD 
Doctrine/Concept  o-f  Operations,”  Kirtland  AFB,  N.M.  Msg  272030Z 
May  88. 

3.  Air  Land  Forces  Application  Agency.  (Dra-ft)  IC90- 
12/MQCDC  FMFRP  0-4E/LANIFLI  IIPz^/IACP  50;50/PACAFP  SO-SQ/USAFEP 
5Qz50/AACP:  Base  Defense  -  Multi  Service  Procedures  for  the 
Defense  of  a  Joint  Base.  Langley  AFB,  Oa:  1  June  1988. 

4.  Coleman,  Richard,  Lt  Col,  USAF.  Hq  Air  Force  Office  of 
Security  Police.  Personal  Interview.  Kirtland  AFB,  N.M.:  5 
December  1988. 

5.  Davis,  Richard  G.  The  3J[  iQitiat i_yesi  A  Study  in  Air 
ESCE®  Z  QoQE§C®ti9D-  Staff  Historical  Study  -  Office  of 
Air  Force  History.  Washington:  1987. 

6.  Hal li day,  John  M.  I®£ticai  Disgersai  of  Fighter 

Aircraft^  BIsISj.  yDESCtSiDiYj.  BSiiEY  B®£2!D!D®Dd§ti2DS* 
2443-AF)  The  Rand  Corp,  Santa  Monica,  Ca,  February  1987. 

7.  Hawkins,  Tex,  Col,  USAF.  PQiQt  B§2g!l  9Q  0iC  E2C£2 
Security  I§§y§§*  Hq  Air  Force  Office  of  Security  Police, 
Kirtland  AFb7~n7m. :  6  May  1988. 

8.  Hawkins,  Tex,  Col,  USAF.  EsiDt  Pager  on  Contingency 
Security  iigment.  Hq  Air  Force  Officer  of  Security  Police, 
Kirtland  AFi,~N7M.;  6  May  1988. 

9.  Harper,  James  C. ,  Ma j ,  USAF.  Hq  Air  Force  Office  of 
Security  Police.  Personal  Interview.  Kirtland  AFB,  N.M.:  6 
December  1988. 

10.  Kenyon,  Robert  W. ,  CPT.  "Air  Base  Ground  Defense: 
Issue  in  Defense,"  Military  Police,  October  1988,  pp.  10-12. 

11.  Marinaro,  Ralph  C. ,  BG.  "Rear  Operations  Doctrine:  A 
Reevaluation  -  Part  1,"  Miiitary  Police,  Spring  1987,  pp.  6-8. 

12.  Marinaro,  Ralph  C. ,  BG.  "Rear  Operations  Doctrine:  A 
Reevaluation  -  Part  II,"  tjilitary  Police,  September  1987,  pp. 
12-14. 

13.  Mumma,  John  H. ,  LTC  and  Riordan,  Jeremiah  C. ,  Lt  Col, 
USAF.  Air  Base  Ground  Defense^  Key  Issues  for  the  1990J.S  Thesis. 
Maxwell  AFB,  A1 :  Air  War  College,  May  1987.  (AU-AWC-87-154) 


26 


14.  Salley,  John  T.,  haj ,  USAF.  Hq  Air  Force  O-ffice  o-f 
Security  Police.  Personal  Interview.  Kirtland  AFB,  N.M.;  6 
December  1988. 

15.  Salley,  John  T.,  Ma j ,  USAF.  MFR  "Projected  Training 
Requirements  -for  GCS  Training,"  Hq  Air  Force  Office  of  Security 
Police,  Kirtland  AFB,  N.M.:  5  December  1988. 

16.  Salley,  John  T. ,  Ma j ,  USAF.  MFR  "Trip  Report  -  In 
Process  Review  of  Ground  Combat  (GCS)  Training,  Ft.  Dix  -  14-18 
November  1988,"  Hq  Air  Force  Office  of  Security  Police,  Kirtland 
AFB,  N.M.:  undated  draft. 

17.  Suvorov,  Viktor.  "Spetsnaz ,  The  Soviet  Union's  Special 
Forces,"  Reprinted  from  International.  Defense  Review,  No.  9/1983, 
Copyright  1083,  Inter avia  S.A.  Geneva,  Switzerland,  in  Course  3, 
iZoint  Forcej.  Doctringj.  and  Planning  Vol  1.  U.S.  War  College, 
Carlisle  Barracks,  Pa:  1988. 


18.  U.S.  Department  of  the  Air  Force  Office  of  Security 
Police,  Air  Force  Regulation  206-2j.  Vgl  1:  Ground  Defense  of 
Main  Operating  Bases,  Installations,  and  Activities.  U.S. 
Goverment  Pi^inting  Office;  22  September  1983. 

19.  U.S.  Department  of  the  Air  Force,  Hq  Air  Force  Office  of 
Security  Police.  "New  Air  Base  Defense  Proposals,"  Kirtland  AFB, 
N.M.:  Briefing  slides  and  script,  undated. 


20.  U.S.  Department  of  the  Air  Force,  Hq  Air  Force  Office  of 
Security  Police.  "Review  of  Army-Tactical  Air  Force  Concept  for 
Rear  Security  Operations  Pamphlet."  Letter  to  TAC,  undated. 


21.  U.S.  Department  of  the  Air  Force,  Hq  Air  Force  Office  of 
Security  Police.  "Revised  Concept  of  Operations  for  Air  Base 
Ground  Defense  (ABGD) ,  and  the  Command  and  Control  of  ABGD 
Forces."  Letter  to  all  MAJCOM  SP  Offices,  23  September  1986. 


Secur i ty 
Review. " 


U.S.  Department  of  the  Air  Force,  Hq  Air  Force  Office  of 
Police,  "USAF  War  and  Mobilization  Plan,  Vol  1,  Annex  T 
Letter  to  SAF/IGS,  28  April  1988. 


23. 
Service 
the  Air 
1985. 


U.S.  Departments  of  the  Army  and  the  Air  Force.  "Joint 
Agreement  -  USA-USAF  Agreement  for  the  Ground  Defense  of 
Force  Bases  and  Installations,"  Washington:  25  April 


24.  U.S.  Departments  of  the  Army  and  the  Air  Force.  "Joint 
Service  Agreement  -  USA-USAF  Agreement  for  the  Initial  and 
Sustainment  Training  of  Air  Force  Ground  Defense  Forces  in  Combat 
Skills,"  Washington:  18  June  1985. 


25.  U.S.  Departments  of  the  Army  and  the  Air  Force. 
"Memorandum  of  Agreement  on  U.S.  Army  -  U.S.  Air  Force  Joint 
Force  Development  Process,"  Washington:  22  may  1984. 


27 


26.  U.S.  Department  of  the  Army.  Degartment  of  the  Army 
P§!!!Eblet  525-14  and  A^r  Force  Pamphlet  206-4;  Joint  Operational 
Concept  for  Air  Base  Ground  Defense.  U.S.  Printing  Office:  July 
1986. 

27.  U.S.  Department  of  the  Army,  Office  of  the  Deputy  Chief 
of  Staff  for  Operations  and  Plans.  "Air  Base  Ground  Defense 
Transition  Plan;  Joint  Force  Development  Initiative  #8," 
Washington;  28  February  1986. 

28.  U.S.  Department  of  the  Army,  Army  Elgld  Manual  90-14^ 
Rear  Battle.  Washington;  10  June  1988.  ~ 

29.  U.S.  Army  Training.  Command  and  Hq  USAF  TAC.  IC90- 
14/IACP  XX^XX/PACAFP  XX;XX/USAFEP  XX-XX/AACP  XX-XX;  Rear  Security 
Operations  -  Army-Tactical  Air  Forces  Concept  for  Rear  Security 
Operations  (Draft).  Fort  Monroe/Langley  AFB,  Va:  15  August 
1988. 

30.  Wheeler,  Michael  I.,  Lt  Col,  USAF.  The  Reality  of  Air 
111®  iCQyod  Defense  --  An  individual  Study  PCQjgct.  Carlisle 
Barracks;  U.S.  Army  War  College,  19  May  1986. 

31.  Willingham,  Frank,  Lt  Col,  USAF.  Office  of  the 
Secretary  of  the  Air  Force,  Office  of  the  Security  Police. 
Personal  Interview.  Washington:  10  November  1988. 


28 


