CITY  OF  POMONA 
COUNCIL  REPORT 


September  17,  2007 


No.  07-370 


To: 

From: 

Submitted  By: 
Subj  ect: 

SUMMARY 


Honorable  Mayor  and  Members  of  the  City  Council 
Douglas  Dunlap,  City  Manager 
Joseph  V.  Romero,  Chief  of  Police 

Approval  of  an  Instructional  Service  Agreement  with  the  Rio  Hondo 
Community  College  District 


Recommendation  -  That  the  City  Council: 

1)  Approve  an  instructional  service  agreement  with  the  Rio  Hondo  Community  College 
District;  and, 

2)  Authorize  the  City  Manager,  or  his  designee,  to  execute  the  agreement  on  behalf  of  the 
City  in  substantially  the  form  submitted. 

Fiscal  Impact  -  This  item  involves  cost  recovery  for  existing  Police  Department  training 
expenses  and  therefore  will  result  in  a  positive  fiscal  impact  that  produces  additional  revenue 
to  the  City’s  General  Fund.  Although  the  exact  amount  to  be  recovered  is  not  fully  known,  it 
is  estimated  that  approximately  $15,000  to  $50,000  in  cost  recovery  revenue  may  be 
generated  annually.  This  estimate  is  based  on  Rio  Hondo  Community  College’s 
reimbursement  formula,  which  is  calculated  on  per-student  attendance  for  each  in-house 
training  class  conducted. 

Public  Noticing  Requirements  -  None. 

Previous  Related  Action  —  None. 

Council  Goals  and  Objectives  -  The  new  agreement  meets  the  objectives  of  the  City 
Council's  Core  Strategy  #VI:  "Develop  mutually  beneficial  relationships  with  external 
organizations.” 


Instructional  Service  Agreement  with  Rio  Hondo  Community  College  District 
September  17,  2007 
Page  2  of  3 

BACKGROUND 

The  Police  Department’s  Training  Bureau  conducts  training  courses  for  full-time  Police  Department 
employees,  which  are  certified  through  the  State  of  California’s  Commission  on  Peace  Officer 
Standards  and  Training  (POST)  standards.  These  courses  are  also  approved  as  part  of  the  Rio  Hondo 
Community  College  District’s  curriculum,  as  meeting  the  requirement  under  the  State  of  California’s 
Education  Code  Section  8092,  Title  5,  and  having  been  approved  by  the  Rio  Hondo  Community 
College  District’s  Board  of  Trustees. 

DISCUSSION 

Over  the  course  of  the  last  several  years,  one  of  the  goals  of  the  Training  Bureau  has  been  to  reduce 
POST  training  costs  by  limiting  reliance  on  outside  agencies  to  provide  POST  certified  training  for 
Police  Department  personnel.  As  a  result  of  these  efforts,  the  Training  Bureau  has  been  able  to 
obtain  POST  certification  for  a  large  portion  of  POST  training  courses.  An  additional  benefit  that 
has  also  resulted  is  that  Pomona  Police  Department  personnel  who  receive  in-house  POST  certified 
training  are  also  eligible  to  receive  college  credit  for  courses  that  meet  the  curriculum  requirements 
of  Rio  Hondo  Community  College.  This  not  only  benefits  the  Police  Department  employee  that 
receives  the  college  credit,  but  also  Rio  Hondo  Community  College,  which  receives  State  funds 
based  upon  training  course  per  student  enrollment. 

Through  recent  negotiations,  the  Pomona  Police  Department  and  Rio  Hondo  Community  College 
have  formalized  a  proposed  agreement  that  is  mutually  beneficial  to  both  parties.  Specifically,  this 
agreement  will  provide  compensation  to  the  Police  Department  for  conducting  specific  State  certified 
POST  courses,  which  police  personnel  are  required  to  attend  and  for  which  they  will  receive  college 
course  credits.  According  to  this  agreement,  police  personnel  who  are  eligible  to  receive  Rio  Hondo 
Community  College  course  credit  for  required  POST  training  courses  conducted  by  the  Pomona 
Police  Department  Training  Bureau,  will  be  enrolled  as  Rio  Hondo  Community  College  students  for 
the  course.  As  such,  Rio  Hondo  Community  College  will  be  eligible  to  receive  funding  on  a  per 
student  basis  for  each  Pomona  Police  Department  enrolled  student.  Accordingly,  for  each  student 
enrolled  in  the  course,  the  Rio  Hondo  Community  College  District  will  split  credit  and/or  non-credit 
apportionment  revenue  received  for  this  program  from  the  State  whereby  30%  will  go  the  Police 
Department  and  70%  will  go  to  the  Rio  Hondo  Community  College  District.  The  apportionment 
revenue  is  the  standard  by  which  other  participating  police  agencies  receive  funding  pursuant  to  their 
agreements  with  Rio  Hondo  Community  College  District,  including  the  Beverly  Hills  Police 
Department,  the  Monrovia  Police  Department,  and  the  Monterey  Park  Police  Department. 

Even  though  the  Police  Department  will  not  receive  full  reimbursement  for  each  in-house  training 
class  it  conducts,  it  will  provide  a  new  source  of  revenue  for  the  City’s  General  Fund  not  previously 
available.  Moreover,  entering  into  an  agreement  with  the  Rio  Hondo  Community  College  District 
will  provide  full-time  Police  Department  employees  an  opportunity  to  achieve  higher  levels  of 
community  service  through  continual  training. 


Instructional  Service  Agreement  with  Rio  Hondo  Community  College  District 
September  17,  2007 
Page  3  of  3 


RECOMMENDATION 

It  is  recommended  that  the  City  Council: 

1)  Approve  an  instructional  service  agreement  with  the  Rio  Hondo  Community  College  District: 
and, 

2)  Authorize  the  City  Manager,  or  his  designee,  to  execute  the  agreement  on  behalf  of  the  City  in 
substantially  the  form  submitted. 


Attachment:  Rio  Hondo  Community  College  Instructional  Service  Agreement 


RIO 

HONDO 

tOUZCE 


Rio  Hondo  Community  College 
3600  Workman  Mill  Road 
Whittier,  CA  90601 

Instructional  Service  Agreement 


This  Agreement,  made  and  entered  Between  the  Rio  Hondo  Community 
College  District,  hereinafter  referred  to  as  the  "District",  and  the  City  of  Pomona  - 
Police  Department  hereinafter  referred  to  as  the  "City"; 

WITNESSETH: 


Article  1  -  Recitals 

Whereas,  the  District  will  provide  vocational  education  programs,  for  selected  eligible 
students  of  the  District,  including  City  of  Pomona  -  Police  Department  employees, 
through  this  Agreement.  The  District  has  the  authority  under  education  code  Section 
70902  to  establish  and  maintain  education  and  service,.  Therefore,  pursuant  to 
California  Education  Code  Section  8092,  Title  5,  California  Code  of  Regulations  55600, 
et  seq.,  the  State  Plan  for  Vocational  Education,  and  the  Federal  Vocational  and  Applied 
Technology  Education  Act,  the  Rio  Hondo  Community  College  District  Board  of  Trustees 
has  determined,  by  resolution,  the  appropriateness  of  offering  vocational  education 
programs  by  contract  The  specific  courses  of  this  instruction  shaii  be  mutually  agreed 
upon,  in  writing,  prior  to  the  beginning  of  each  academic  year  and  shall  be  filed  with  this 
agreement;  and 

Whereas,  in  accordance  with  Education  Code  Section  78015,  the  Board  of  Trustees  of 
the  Rio  Hondo  Community  College  District,  prior  to  establishing  a  vocational  or 
occupational  training  program  has  conducted  a  job  market  study  of  the  labor  market 
area  and  determined  that  the  results  justify  this  program;  and 

Whereas,  it  is  mutually  agreed  that  both  the  City  and  the  District  will  insure  that  ancillary 
and  support  services  are  provided  for  the  students  (e.g.  Counseling  and  Guidance, 
Placement  Assistance);  and 

Whereas,  the  District  does  hereby  certify  that  it  does  not  receive  full  compensation  for 
the  direct  education  costs  of  the  course{s)  from  any  public  or  private  agency,  individual 
or  group;  and 


1 


Whereas  the  District  and  the  City  desire  to  enter  into  an  agreement  concerning  the 
calculation  and  payment  of  costs  pursuant  to  Labor  Code  Section  3074  and  Education 
Code  Section  81160, 

Now  and  therefore,  in  consideration  of  the  conditions,  covenants,  terms,  agreements, 
and  recitals  contained  herein,  it  is  mutually  agreed  as  follows: 

Article  if  -  Classes 

The  courses  of  instruction  and  the  outlines  of  record  for  such  courses  are  described  as 
but  limited  to: 

A.  Administration  of  Justice 

B.  POST  Classes 

These  courses  have  been  certified  through  the  State  California  Commission  on  Peace 
Officer  Standards  and  Training  (POST)  and  approved  by  the  District’s  curriculum 
committees  as  meeting  Title  5  course  standards  and  the  courses  have  been  approved 
by  the  Board  of  Trustees.  Numbers  of  class  hours  are  sufficient  to  meet  performance 
objectives.  Students  may  withdraw  prior  to  completion  of  course  or  program: 

Article  111  -  Responsibilities  of  the  District 

A.  Instruction  and  Curriculum 


1 .  The  District  is  responsible  for  obtaining  certification  verifying  that  the 
instructional  activity  to  be  conducted  will  not  be  fully  funded  by  other  sources. 

2.  The  District  will  provide  approved  college  curriculum  for  use  in  instruction 
provided  under  this  agreement. 

3.  The  District  has  the  primary  right  to  control  and  direct  the  activities  of  the 
instructional  staff  furnished  by  the  City. 

4.  District  will  register  students  and  these  records  shall  be  available  for  review  at 
ail  times, 

5.  Enrollment  in  the  course(s)  must  be  open  to  any  person  who  has  been 
admitted  to  the  College/District  and  has  met  any  applicable  prerequisites  (Title 
5  Sections  51006  and  58106). 

6.  The  District  policy  on  open  enrollment  is  published  in  the  college  catalogue, 
schedule  of  classes,  and  any  addenda  to  the  schedule  of  classes  along  with  a 
description  of  the  course  and  information  about  whether  the  course  is  offered 
for  credit  and  is  transferable  (Title  5  Sections  51006  and  55005). 

7.  Degree  and  certificate  programs  are  approved  by  the  State  Chancellor’s  Office 
and  courses  that  make  up  the  programs  are  part  of  the  approved  programs,  or 
the  Col  lege/ District  has  received  delegated  authority  to  separately  approve 
those  courses  locally. 

8.  Records  of  student  attendance  and  achievement  will  be  maintained  by  the 
District.  Records  will  be  open  for  review  at  all  times  by  officials  of  the 
College/District  and  submitted  on  a  schedule  developed  by  the  District. 

9.  instruction  to  be  claimed  for  apportionment  under  this  Agreement  is  under  the 
immediate  supervision  and  control  of  an  employee  of  the  District  who  has  met 
the  minimum  qualifications  for  instruction  in  vocational  subject  for  a  California 
Community  College  (Title  5,  Section  58058). 


2 


10.  Where  the  City’s  instructor  is  not  a  paid  employee  of  the  District,  the  District 
shall  demonstrate  controi  through  such  actions  as  providing  the  instructor  with 
an  orientation,  instructor’s  manual,  course  outlines,  curriculum  materials, 
testing  and  grading  procedures,  and  any  other  materials  and  services  it  would 
provide  to  its  hourly  instructors  on  campus. 

11.  The  District  shall  provide  the  City  with  fist  of  minimum  qualifications  for 
instructors  teaching  the  courses  covered  by  this  Agreement  and  that  the 
qualifications  are  consistent  with  requirements  in  other  similar  courses  given  at 
the  District. 

Article  IV  -  Responsibilities  of  City 

A.  Instruction  and  Curriculum 

1.  All  courses  are  open  to  enrollment  by  any  student  who  has  been 
admitted  to  the  District  subject  to  facility  or  other  proper  limitations  on 
enrollment. 

2.  The  City  will  maintain  current  accurate  records  of  student  attendance  and 
progress,  and  consents  to  inspection  by  authorized  representatives  of  the 
District,  the  California  Community  College  Board  of  Governors,  the 
Bureau  of  School  Approval  and  other  persons  or  entities  as  required  by 
law. 

3.  All  courses  under  this  Agreement  will  meet  applicable  State  Criteria  and 
standard  and/or  approval. 

4.  The  City  shall  organize  and  provide  class  schedules,  monitor  students, 
maintain  records  of  work  experience  education  and  be  responsible  for 
apprentice  evaluation  and  counseling  regarding  on-site  work  experience. 

5.  The  City  will  provide  instruction  for  students  using  approved  curriculum 
provided  by  the  District. 

6.  The  City  will  require  instructors  to  complete  any  training  mandated  by  the 
State  of  California  for  instructor  credentlaling. 

7.  The  City  will  provide  but  not  be  limited  to  guest  lecturers,  equipment, 
materials,  day-to-day  management  support  and  other  related  services 
necessary  to  conduct  these  continuing  education  classes. 

8.  Where  the  instructor  is  not  a  paid  employee  of  the  District,  the  City 
instructor  wili  meet  the  appropriate  qualifications  as  determined  by  the 
Rio  Hondo  Community  College  District.  The  District  has  the  primary  right 
to  control  and  direct  the  instructional  activities  of  the  instructor.  NOTE: 

The  District  will  demonstrate  control  and  direction  through  such  actions 
as  providing  the  instructor  with  an  orientation,  instructor’s  manual,  course 
outlines,  curriculum  materials,  testing  and  grading  procedures,  and  any 
other  materials  and  services  it  would  provide  to  its  hourly  instructors  on 
campus,  (instructor  may  be  required  to  sign  a  separate  contract  stating 
that  the  District  has  primary  right  to  control  and  direct  the  instructor’s 
activities  as  they  relate  to  this  Agreement). 

9.  The  City  shall  provide  clerical  support  to  maintain  training  records. 

10.  The  City  shall  assist  the  District  with  student  registration  procedures, 
associated  paperwork,  and  other  support  services  to  adequately  manage 
and  control  the  course  curricula  and  City  of  Pomona  -  Police 
Department  student  population. 


3 


1 1 .  The  City  shall  provide  funds  for  and  administer  instructor  workshops. 

The  City’s  financial  resources  are  adequate  to  ensure  operation  for  the 
duration  of  this  Agreement,  and  the  City  on  a  basis  of  sound 
administrative  policies  and  adhere  to  Rio  Hondo  Community  College 
District's  compliance  with  State  Regulations:  Titles  VI  and  1964;  Title  iX 
of  the  Education  Amendments  of  1972;  Sections  503  and  504  of  the 
Rehabilitation  Act  of  1973;  the  Americans  with  Disabilities  Act  of  1 990; 
and  the  Age  Discrimination  Act  of  1990,  and  does  not  discriminate  on  the 
basis  of  race  religious  creed,  color,  national  origin,  ancestry,  physical  or 
mental  disability,  medical  condition,  marital  status,  gender,  age,  ethnic 
group  identification,  sexual  orientation  or  status  as  a  Vietnam-era 
veteran,  in  any  of  its  policies,  procedures,  or  practices. 

12.  City  shall  employ  instructional  aids.  Such  personnel  will  be  responsible 
for  assisting  instructors  and  placing  all  classroom  equipment  and 
materials  in  the  training  areas  when  needed  by  the  instructors.  They  will 
assist  the  instructors  in  the  restoring  of  the  classroom  area  to  a  neat  and 
orderly  condition  and  in  the  return  of  equipment,  and  surplus  materials  to 
the  proper  storage  areas  after  classes. 

13.  The  City  and  ail  of  the  City’s  employees  or  agents  shall  secure  and 
maintain  in  force  such  licenses  and  permits  that  are  required  by  law,  in 
connection  with  the  furnishing  of  materials,  supplies,  or  services  herein 
listed. 

B.  Facilities,  Equipment  and  Supplies 

1.  District  shall  provide  and  maintain  its  own  training  facilities  and  CITY  OF 
POMONA  -  POLICE  DEPARTMENT  shall  provide  and  maintain  classroom 
space  at  its  various  facility  locations  for  use  as  off-campus  sites  by  the 
District  for  mutually  agreed  upon  courses. 

2.  If  said  facilities  are  off-campus,  they  are  hereby  designated  as  off-campus 
facilities  pursuant  to  Labor  Code  Section  3074. 

2.  Courses  must  be  held  at  facilities  which  are  clearly  identified  as  being  open 
to  the  general  public  (Title  5,  Section  58051.5).  Exception;  some  in-service 
training  courses  may  be  conducted  on  sites/instailations  that  may  require 
a  Department  of  Defense  Secret  and/or  Top  Security  Clearance  which  will 
limit  enrollment  to  CITY  OF  POMONA  -  POLICE  DEPARTMENT 
employees  only  and  not  to  the  general  public  due  to  national  security 
requirements. 

3.  If  the  classes  are  to  be  located  outside  the  boundaries  of  the  District,  the 
District  must  comply  with  the  requirement  of  Title  5,  Sections  55230 
through  55232  concerning  approval  by  adjoining  high  school  or  community 
college  districts  and  use  of  non-district  facilities. 

4.  CITY  OF  POMONA  -  POLICE  DEPARTMENT  physical  facilities  meet 
requirements  for  state  and  local  safety  and  health  regulations  and  its 
equipment  and  instructional  materials  are  adequate  and  suitable  for  the 
courses  offered  and  the  number  of  students  in  attendance. 

5.  CITY  OF  POMONA  -  POLICE  DEPARTMENT  shall  provide  instructional 
supplies  and  materials. 


4 


Article  V  -  Genera!  Provisions 


A.  This  Agreement  shall  commence  with  the  regular  school  term  starting 
July  19,  2007  and  ending  June  30,  2012. 

B.  This  Agreement  may  be  terminated  by  the  other  party  providing  a  minimum 
sixty  {60}  Days  written  notice  of  their  intent  to  terminate  or  not  to  renew  the 
agreement.  Renewal  is  subject  to  the  terms  of  Paragraph  V.H,  below. 

C.  it  is  agreed  that  the  City  or  any  employee  or  agent  of  the  City  is  acting  as  an 
independent  City  and  not  as  an  agent  or  employee  of  the  District  The  City 
shall  be  solely  responsible  for  the  salaries  and  other  benefits  including  Liability 
Insurance,  Workers’  Compensation  Insurance  and  or  any  other  insurance 
coverage  for  personnel  and  students. 

D.  Neither  the  District  nor  the  City  receives  full  funding  for  the  instruction  from  the 
State  or  other  sources.  It  is  the  intent  of  this  Agreement  that  the  District  and 
the  City  combine  their  resources  to  provide  the  instruction  that  would  not  have 
been  possible  but  for  the  combination  of  resources.  The  funds  received/paid 
by  either  party  under  this  Agreement  must  be  more  than  a  trivial  amount  used 
to  augment  the  instruction  program. 

E.  The  District  shall  pay  the  City  on  a  regular  basis.  The  City  shall  submit  and 
certify  monthly  statements  and  billings  to  the  District  on  the  last  day  of  each 
month  for  which  contracted  instruction  is  given,  including  a  daily  tally  of 
certified  training  attendance  hours  by  individual  student  enrollment  utilizing  the 
College/District  Attendance  and  Training  Report  Forms,  The  per-siudent 
amount  shall  not  exceed  the  total  direct  and  indirect  costs  to  provide  the  same 
training  in  the  District.  There  shall  be  no  additional  tuition  charged  for  any 
program  included  in  the  Agreement.  Students  must  be  certified  to  the  District 
for  attendance  purposes  during  the  preceding  month  at  the  City's  place  of 
instruction,  be  in  good  standing  at  the  College/District,  and  demonstrate 
satisfactory  progress  in  the  coursework, 

F.  The  District  will  split  credit  and/or  non-credit  apportionment  revenue 
received  for  this  program  from  the  State  whereby  30%  will  go  to  the  CITY 
OF  POMONA  -  POLICE  DEPARTMENT  and  70%  will  go  to  the  District, 

G.  Neither  this  Agreement  nor  any  duties  or  obligations  under  this  Agreement 
may  be  assigned  by  the  City  without  the  prior  written  consent  of  both  parties. 

H.  When  the  following  conditions  exist,  this  Agreement  may  be  cancelled  by 
either  said  party  hereto  upon  giving  notice  referred  to  in  Paragraph  V.B., 
above.  Such  notice  shall  be  personally  served  or  given  in  the  United  States 
Mail. 

1 .  Emergency  conditions  resulting  from  acts  of  GOD. 

2.  Non-performance  of  the  terms  of  this  Agreement 

I.  It  is  agreed  that  the  District  will  not  withhold  any  Federal  or  State  income  tax 
from  payment  made  pursuant  to  this  contract,  but  will  provide  the  City  with  a 
statement  of  earnings  at  the  end  of  each  calendar  year. 

5 


J.  The  City  certifies  that  the  City  is  aware  of  the  laws  of  the  State  of  California 
requiring  employers  to  be  insured  against  liability  for  Worker's  Compensation. 
The  City  shall  provide  workers'  compensation  and  professional  liability 
insurance  or  self-insure  its  services, 

K.  The  City  shall  indemnify,  and  hold  harmless  the  District  and  its  agents, 
servants  and  employees  of  and  from  any  and  all  liabilities,  claims,  debts, 
damages,  demands,  suits,  actions  and  causes  of  action  of  whatsoever  kind, 
nature  or  sort  arising  out  of,  or  in  any  manner  connected  with  the  performance 
by  the  City  of  any  sen/ices  hereunder,  and  the  City  shall  assume  full 
responsibility  for  payments  of  Federal,  State,  and  local  taxes  or  contributions 
imposed  or  required  under  the  Social  Security,  Worker’s  Compensation,  and 
income  tax  law,  or  any  disability  or  unemployment  law,  or  retirement 
contributions  of  any  sort  whatever,  concerning  the  City  or  any  employee  or 
agent  thereof,  and  shall  further  indemnify  and  hold  harmless  the  District  of  and 
from  any  such  payment  or  liability  arising  out  of  or  in  any  manner  connected 
with  the  City’s  performance  under  this  agreement,  except  to  the  extent  caused 
by  the  negligent  or  wrongful  acts  or  omissions  of  the  District,  its  employees  or 
agents. 


IN  WITNESS  WHEREOF,  the  parties  hereto  have  executed  this  Agreement  on  the  day 
and  year  first  written  below. 


DISTRICT 

Rio  Hondo  Community  College  District 
3600  Workman  Mill  Road 
Whittier,  CA  90601 


CITY 

City  of  Pomona  -  Police  Department 
490  w.  Mission 
Pomona,  CA  91766 


Signed 


Teresa  Dreyfuss 

Vice  President,  Finance  and  Business 


7? 


Date 


Date 


RHC  Board  Approval: _  _ 

Employer  Identification  Number  (E!N) 


6 


